[High-speed Railway 1 (2023) 6–17](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hspr.2022.12.001)


[Contents lists available at ScienceDirect](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/29498678)
## High-speed Railway


[journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/high-speed-railway](https://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/high-speed-railway)


Review Article
### Security of railway control systems: A survey, research issues and challenges

Zujun Yu, Hongwei Wang [⁎], Feng Chen

_Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China_





A R T I C L E I N F O


_Keywords:_
High speed railway
Railway control system
Security


**1. Introduction**



A B S T R A C T


With the rapid development of railway transportation, higher requirements for capacity are increasing and amount of
communication, computer and control technologies are applied in train control systems which is the popular method
for train control. The application of 3 C brings the enhancement of railway transportation performance. However, the
number of internal and external cyber security threats is rising, which could lead to some railway accidents. On the
other hand, safety is the core of the design process for railway but security is rarely considered due to the closure of
traditional railway systems. As cyber security is threatening the normal operation of industrial control systems and the
critical infrastructure, security issues of train control systems should be paid more attention as railway transportation
play an important role for society and economy. However, due to the safety-critical characteristics, safety assessment
and analysis works have been performed for a long time, but cyber security related works are rarely considered. In the
paper, we demonstrate the security situation of train control systems based on the inherent features and the experience
of other industrial control systems, where the technical defects and potential threats are summarized. According to the
practical engineering experience, the current security protection strategies are illustrated, which shows the popular
security protection methods are limited and cannot realize the defense-in-depth. Finally, some research challenges of
security issues of train control systems are identified.



At present, railway is developing rapidly in China, where the length of
High Speed Railway (HSR) is more than 30,000 km and about two-third of
the world’s high speed railways [1]. China also has made the considerable
progress in urban rail transit, where there are 185 lines and the total op­
eration length is more than 5700 km [2]. Ensuring the punctuality of trains
traveling is the significant goal of railway, which can promote the sus­
tainable development and bring the maintenance of social stabilization.
However, emergency events can largely affect the operation of railways,
such as equipment failures, heavy weather and geological disaster, which
could cause trains delays and cancelation of a large area. As a matter of fact,
human factors are generally becoming an important cause leading to the
destruction of railway transportation organization, where the typical one is
cyber security, just the same as the other industrial control systems [3,4]. In
order to improve the operation continuity of railways and enhance the
ability to defense the cyber attacks and recovery from the security events, it
is significant to determine the security state of railways and propose some
available solutions for the key train control systems of railways.

The US government focused on the security of critical infrastructure
systems in 1997, which divided the threats into several types: physical
threats, cyber threats, the Internet threats and the information warfare [5].



The National Infrastructure Protection Plan (NIPP) [6] has been started
from 2006, which provides the unifying structure for the integration of
critical infrastructure and key resources protection into a single national
program. Therefore, the Department of Homeland Security developed a
plan to describe a national unity of effort to achieve critical infrastructure
security and resilience in 2013 [7]. The transportation system sector is one
of the 16 critical infrastructure sectors, which are considered so vital to the
United States that their incapacitation or destruction would have a debili­
tating effect on security, national economic security, national public health
or safety, or any combination thereof. As a result, the 2015 transportation
systems sector- specific plan [8] is developed, which identifies the trans­
portation system’s security and resilience priorities, and describes the ap­
proach to manage critical infrastructure risks, where the railway system is
included. Similarly, the European Union have also done much work to
protect the information security of the critical infrastructure systems. As a
successful cyber attack could cause casualties or result in the loss of vital
infrastructure service, EU developed the European Programme for Critical
Infrastructure Protection (EPCIP) in 2004 [9]. Authors of [10] proposed that
an infrastructure may be de- composed into three layers: Physical, Cyber
and Organization layer, where the different meanings of the Critical Infra­
structure Protection (CIP) and the Critical Information Infrastructure
Protection (CIIP) were demonstrated.



⁎ Corresponding author.

_E-mail address:_ [hwwang@bjtu.edu.cn (H. Wang).](mailto:hwwang@bjtu.edu.cn)



[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hspr.2022.12.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hspr.2022.12.001)
Received 2 November 2022; Received in revised form 5 December 2022; Accepted 15 December 2022
Available online 20 December 2022
2949-8678/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
[(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)


_Z. Yu, H. Wang and F. Chen_ _High-speed Railway 1 (2023) 6–17_



Wireless communications are widely applied for Chinese railway sys­
tems, which can provide bi-directional, high capacity and continuous
method for the information exchange between trains and control centers.
For high speed railways, the Global System for Mobile Communications for
Railway (GSM-R) is used while the Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) is
employed for the urban rail transit systems. Through the wireless commu­
nications, the control command for the control center is real-timely trans­
mitted to the trains and the information of train status is also realtimely
reported to the control center, which can ensure the safe and efficient op­
eration of rail vehicles [11]. With the requirements for train- ground com­
munications being increasing, the LTE (Long-term Revolution) for metro/
railway (LTE M/LTE R) is going to be adopted in railway systems [12],
which can provide more se- curity mechanisms and larger capacity to afford
multi-service. Due to the significant role of wireless communication, the
train control system with wireless communications for railways is called
Communication-based Train Control (CBTC).

Generally, the traditional train control system without wire-less com­
munications is considered to be closed which uses track circuits as the main
communication method between trains and the control center for it is a
physical private network. However, the CBTC systems are open with the
application of wireless communications, which could bring the risks of se­
curity [13]. In 2004, the signalling system of Australian Railcorp was in­
fected by a Sasser worm, which prevented drivers from talking to signal
boxes, and it caused almost 300000 commuters stranded. In 2012, trains of
Shenzhen Subway line 2 and line 5 in China were forced to stop as trainground communications had been interfered by portable Wi-Fi devices in
carriages, and the investigation proved that the interference was uninten­
tional. According to the control principles of CBTC systems, when the in­
terference exists which could cause the interruption of train-ground communications, if the interruption latency is larger than the preset threshold, the
train has to trigger the emergency braking mechanism in order to keep safe.
As a result, the interference will not cause safety related accidents including
collisions and derailing, but the efficiency is badly affected especially during
the rush hours1. In addition, through the events, vulnerabilities of CBTC
systems are shown for the public.

From the perspective of Industry Control Systems (ICS), with the de­
velopment of information technologies, the ICS is becoming complicated
with more and more subsystems joining through the wide application of
standard protocols and operation systems. Therefore, the inherent vulner­
abilities and risks of attacks are enhanced. In 2011, Stuxnet worm destroyed
Iran’s nuclear facilities, which is a warning to the security of CBTC systems.
As CBTC systems play an important role for public transportation, disastrous
consequences could be lead to if any vulnerability is caught by some mal­
icious users. Therefore, security issue of ICS have been attracted much at­
tention of administration. The IEC 62443 standard [14] was identified as a
starting point to integrate security in their domain specific safety standards

[15]. However, there are not specific details about railway systems, which is
much different from the other ICS. According to the IEC 62443 standard,
the German standard DIN VDE V 0831–104 develops a security engineering
process for secure railway signalling [16].

There are some works considering the security issues of CBTC systems
from the view of wireless communications. Considering CBTC systems are
safety-critical, the authors of [17] realized that the application of the Com­
mercial Off the Shelf (COTS) wireless equipment would bring risks of se­
curity and some corresponding solutions were proposed which developed
the Safety Layer (SL) for the existed protocol stack. Korean railway re­
searchers added the security factors of railway systems into hazard cases and
developed a tool to measure the safety and security of CBTC systems [18].

J. Smith [19] proposed that the case of security could be treated as
one type of safety issues for railway systems, where the safety is also
treated as the context of the more general concept of dependability. In
order to quantify the safety and security, [20] applied a network si­
mulation tool to assess the performance of IEEE 802.11.

To the best of our knowledge, the systematic analysis about the security
issues for CBTC systems has not been well ad- dressed in previous works, as
the characteristics of railway sig- nalling systems are not generally



considered. With the detailed understanding of CBTC operation principles,
the research on security should begin with finding the vulnerabilities and
bugs of protocols, architectures and control mechanisms. Therefore, the
available attack methods can be determined. Based on the security assess­
ment technique, the damage of attacks on the discoverable vulnerabilities
can be quantified, which could help to design and develop corresponding
reasonable protection mechanisms. In this paper, we will discuss the new
trends and characteristics of security in CBTC systems, and provide a
comprehensive review of the potential vulnerabilities and bugs, possible
attacking types, available protection mechanism and security assessment.

In the following of this paper, we will elaborate on these aspects and
discuss the related issues. In Section II, a typical CBTC system is illu­
strated, where the security situation and some technical defects are
summarized based on the inherent characteristics. The potential threats
are shown in Section III, and in Section IV, the popular security pro­
tection methods are demonstrated according to the engineering ex­
perience. In Section V, we present some open research challenges in
CBTC security issues, and finally, we conclude this study in Section VI.

**2. Security of CBTC systems**


In the section, the architecture of the typical CBTC system is in­
troduced, and the characteristics of CBTC systems are summarized
which are much different from the other ICS. Therefore, the security
issue of CBTC systems are present.

_2.1. A typical CBTC system_


The aim of CBTC is to improve the efficiency of train operation through
the application of wireless communications, and the level of system safety
should also be enhanced. Fig. 1 describes a typical CBTC system, which
consists of on-board subsystems, Data Communication Systems (DCS) and
trackside subsystems. The trackside subsystems are connected through the
wired (Ethernet) network, which provide the movement.

The Movement Authority (MA) for on-board systems through the
wireless network. Similarly, the information of trains including the current
location and the speed is transmitted to the trackside subsystems which
helps to calculate the MA. Although the same system architecture is ap­
plied, the high speed railway systems are much more complicated than the
urban rail transit systems and some distinctions are shown in Table 1. In
the view of functions, the VOBC includes Automatic Train Operation
(ATO) and Automatic Train Protection (ATP), but there is no ATO for high
speed railways. For trackside subsystems, the RBC and the ZC almost plays
the same role, which is to generate and transmit the MA information. One
big difference is the main method of train-ground wireless communica­
tions, where the high speed railway is using GSM-R and the urban rail
transit is using WLAN or other COTS technologies.

The railway line is usually divided into areas or regions. Each area is
under the control of a ZC or RBC and has its own wireless transmission


**Fig. 1.** A communication-based train control (CBTC) systems.



7


_Z. Yu, H. Wang and F. Chen_ _High-speed Railway 1 (2023) 6–17_


**Table 1**
Key devices of cbtc systems for high speed railways and urban rail transit systems.

Subsystem High speed railways Urban rail transit systems


On-board Subsystems Vital Computer (VC) Vehicle On-board Computer (VOBC)
Trackside Subsystems Radio Block Center (RBC) Zone Controller (ZC)
The wireless network GSM-R WLAN or Other COTS Technologies



system. Each train transmits its identity (ID), position, direction and ve­
locity to the ZC (RBC). The continuous wireless link between each train
and the ZC (RBC) can ensure that the ZC (RBC) knows the status in­
formation of all train in its area all the time. Each train computes a
braking curve with the MA which is generated based on the location of
the train (or some obstacles) in front of it. Therefore, the current train can
stop before it reaches the front train in order to keep safe. Theoretically,
as long as each train is traveling at the same speed and have the same
braking capability, they can travel as close as a few meters between them.
However, the unreliable wireless communications can lead to commu­
nication interruptions and long latency in the view of performance which
is the current key research of the train-ground communications [21]. Due
to the characteristics of wireless communications, the security issues
should be one more important point, which could result in safety-related
accidents. Besides the security vulnerabilities of wireless communications,
there are more and more potential vulnerabilities from the application
software, the operation systems, the hardware platforms with the wide
application of COTS IT technologies.


_2.2. The security situation of CBTC systems_


Compared with the traditional industrial control systems, the
characteristics of CBTC systems could be summarized as follows:

 - [The application of wireless communications brings a more efficient ]
CBTC system. However, it is possible for malicious attackers to il­
legal access the control network, which could bring unpredictable
effects that are hard to be assessed.

 - [The railway networks are deployed at the wide area across the ]
country which means it offers high opportunities for attackers, and
the probabilities of security attacks on CBTC systems are high,
especially with the application of open wireless communications.

 - [The COTS technology is widely used in CBTC systems, which is not ]
originally designed for railways. As a result, the security issues are
not considered.

 - [The transmission protocols are not verified through security as­]

sessment, which means some potential vulnerabilities could be used
by malicious attackers, and it can result in catastrophic accidents.


As mentioned above, CBTC systems rely on the wireless commu­
nications between trains and the ground control center [22]. Specifi­
cally, it shows different features when the CBTC technologies are used
respectively in high-speed railways and urban rail transit systems. The
high-speed railway systems apply GSM-R as the primary method of
train-ground commu- nications while the WLANs are adopted in urban
rail transit systems. According to the analysis on GSM-R [23], there is
no end to end encryption in GSM-R protocols, which means the wireless
link between Mobile Stations (MS) and Base Stations (BS) is encrypted
while the information between BS and BS is transmitted in clear texts.
What’s more, the GSM- R uses one-way authentication, which means
the network (BS) needs to authenticate the MS when it tries to access
but there is no the same authentication process when the BS tries to
communication with the MS. As a result, some active attacks can effi­
ciently steal information transmitted in the GSM-R network in the form
of false BS and make the network collapse.

As WLANs work at the public frequency band, the urban rail transit
systems face the same security risks compared with high-speed railway



systems. Firstly, the interference is unavoidable, which has attracted
the attention of subway operators and some research has been done

[24–26]. Secondly, as the 802.11 protocols are not originally designed
for railways, it shows some problems when WLANs are applied as the
main method of train-ground communications, such as the handoff
mechanisms [21]. Above all, the working frequency of WLANs is high
and the coverage of one AP is small, which is 300500 m. As a result, the
handoff happens frequently when the train travels with the high speed,
and it provides more opportunities for attackers to access the network
with the deficiency of WLAN handoff mechanisms. In fact, there are
various WLAN products of different manufactures in urban rail transit
systems, including Cisco, Simens, H3C and so on. Because of the im­
perfection of 802.11 protocols, there is big difference between different
products and it brings much more security issues for CBTC systems.

However, as the CBTC systems could also be considered as a typical
cyber physical system [27], the CBTC system could be divided into two
parts: cyber space and physical space. According to the ANSI/ISA 99
standards, a reference model for ICS systems is proposed, and we build
the same one based on the architecture of CBTC systems as shown in
Fig. 2. For CBTC systems, the Centralized Traffic Control (CTC) of highspeed railway systems and the Automatic Train Supervision (ATS) of
urban transit rail systems belong to the level 3 which is the operations
management; the track circuit for high speed railway systems, axle
counters of urban transit rail systems and Balise belong to the level 2
which is the supervisory control; The Vital Computer (VC) and Radio
Block Center (RBC) for high speed railway systems and Vehicle on
Board Computer (VOBC) and Zone Controller (ZC) for urban transit rail
systems belong to the level 1 which is the basic or local control. Level 1,
2 and 3 belong to the cyber space. The level 0 which is the actual
physical process belongs to the physical space that is the train in CBTC
systems. From the reference model, the biggest difference between IT


**Fig. 2.** The model of CBTC systems based on ISA-99 standards.



8


_Z. Yu, H. Wang and F. Chen_ _High-speed Railway 1 (2023) 6–17_



security and ICS security is that ICS could control the physical entity
and the malicious attacks could cause the physical entity destroyed
which could lead to casualty and property losses.

As shown in Fig. 2, the train is always running which means the
requirements for CBTC train-ground communications are high. In the
view of security, the train-ground communications should be resilient
when some accidents happen. As a result, in CBTC systems, there are
some backup designs for train- ground wireless communication. For
urban rail transit systems, there are two radio channels allocated for
control command transmission which is dual-net redundant. In addi­
tion, if both of channels are blocked, the train-ground communications
are realized through the axel counters and Balise. However, though the
train is still running, the speed is smaller and the headway is larger
which could decrease the efficiency and capacity of the overall subway
line. For high-speed railway systems, the same mechanism is applied.
When the wireless communication is interrupted, the track circuit and
Balise are used to transmit the control command and the cost is the
reduction of running speed from 350 km/h or 300 km/h to 250 km/h.

Therefore, the traditional design of CBTC systems includes some
safety mechanism which can increase the system resilience. However,
the security related design is relatively infrequent, such as the appli­
cation of the Railway Signal Safety Protocol (RSSP) which is based on
the EN50159 standards [28,29]. However, the existed security protec­
tion mechanisms are designed for the single packet or network node.
Therefore, the coordinated attack possibly affect the confidentiality or
integrity, which has hacked the Ukrainian power grid. In order to
eliminate the security threats and develop efficient defense strategies,
we need to find the vulnerabilities of CBTC systems based on the exited
mechanisms.


_2.3. Technical defects_


In the section, we analyze the characteristics of train ground com­
munications and the critical devices, and the corresponding technical
defects are summarized. Based on the fail-safe mechanisms, some se­
curity strategies are applied which is designed for safety. However, due
to being lack of systematic and pertinent security solutions, the CBTC
systems are facing rigorous security risks.

_Train Ground Communication Systems:_ In CBTC systems, the in­
formation transmission process could be treated as a triangle as shown
in Fig. 3, where the communication process is periodic. For each
communication cycle, every train should report its status including the
velocity and the location to the RBC/ZC, and the RBC/ZC will generate
a Movement Authority (MA) to every train, which could tell the train
where the nearest train or the obstacle (e.g. stations) and the train will
compute a recommended speed curve in order to guarantee the train
stop before the end of the nearest train or the obstacle. During the
transmission process, the train adopts the train-ground wireless com­
munications to transmit its status to the base station or receive the MA



from the base station. Meanwhile, the transmission between the base
station and RBC/ZC is through wire communication. Obviously, the
wireless communication is easy to be affected as it works at the open
space. As a matter of facts, the operation environment of train-ground
communications is complicated, e.g. free space [30,31], leaky wave­
guide [32,33] and leaky coaxial cable [34] for urban rail transit sys­
tems, free space, leaky coaxial cable for high speed railway. On the
other hand, the railway lines is distributed in a large area, e.g. the
length of Beijing- Guangzhou high speed railway is 2294 km, which
offers more opportunities for malicious attacks to perform the intrusion
of the train-ground wireless communication systems.

As mentioned above, there are some redundant mechanisms such as
the dual-redundant network, where there is overlapping coverage be­
tween adjacent base stations and there are two working channels and
equipment for urban rail transit systems. However, the redundant me­
chanism only avoids the faults of equipment, but it cannot dealt the
security issues. As a result, the RSSP has been applied as the data
transmission protocol for train-ground communications in high-speed
railway systems as shown in Fig. 4, which can deal with the risks of
repetition, deletion, insertion, re-sequencing, corruption, delay and
masquerade. As the RSSP protocols are public, it is possible that the
malicious attackers completely understand the transmission principles
and set up a false base station to send a bad command which could
cause accidents. Especially, the WLAN equipment works at the public
frequency and a rogue AP can be easily built [35,36] which could send
some false information to the MS on the train in urban rail transit
systems. Similarly, the rogue base station is also the problem [13] for
high speed railway systems as the unidirectional authentication [37] is
applied in GSM-R base train-ground communications.

Based on the fail-safe principles of railway signalling systems, when
the communication systems are affected so badly that the control com­
mand cannot be received by the train, the emergency braking happens.
As a result, the operation efficiency is reduced. Trains are running along
the tracks, so the train has to brake or stop when the front train stops due
to some failures. Furthermore, for one railway line, as there are lots of
trains running at the same time, the emergency braking of one train will
cause the change of running trajectories of the back trains. Fig. 5 illus­
trates a timetable of a simulation railway line where there are 16 running
trains and 14 stations. Train 1 and Train 2 are running according to the
predefined timetable. However, some failures lead to the emergency
braking of the train 3. According to the engineering practical experience,
if the failures can be repaired, the train will be restarted from the
emergency braking and it costs about 10 s except the repairing time. In
the simulation, we consider the repairing time as 0 which means train 3
takes 10 s to restart from the emergency braking. From Fig. 6, train 3
stays at the station 12 about 10 s, which forces the back trains changing
the predefined running profile of back trains which should have been the
same as that of train Obviously, train 4 has to brake to stop due to the
emergency braking of train 3.



**Fig. 3.** The information transmission process of CBTC systems.


9


_Z. Yu, H. Wang and F. Chen_ _High-speed Railway 1 (2023) 6–17_


**Fig. 6.** The running profiles of Train 2, 3 and 4.


**Fig. 4.** The application of RSSP.



**Fig. 5.** The effects of Train No. 3 Emergency Braking.


The simulation results show the effects of emergency braking of one
train on the back trains, which focuses on the operation efficiency.
However, if the exchange information between trains and the control
center, e.g. MA, some disasters may happen, such as the collisions. Due
to the characteristics of wireless communications, the risks of security
attacks should be considered [38,39].


_2.4. Critical devices_


The railway signalling system is a integration of computer tech­
nology, control technology and communication technology. Computers
play a key role and the critical computer devices are divided into two
types: dedicated devices and commercial devices. In order to achieve the
demanded performance of signalling systems including reliability,
availability, maintainability and safety, some faulttolerant designs are
applied in CBTC systems [40–42], such as the ’Dual-Computer HotStandby’ architecture, the ’Two Out of Three’ architecture and the
’Double Two Out of Two’ architecture, shown in Fig. 7. Therefore, the
railway signalling system can be protected from most risks of harms. In
fact, the application of fault-tolerant can bring potential helps for the
security risks, as it provides the crossvalidation and mutual-discipline
mechanisms which enhance the attacking difficulties for malicious



**Fig. 7.** (a) the Dual-Computer Hot-Standby architecture, (b) the Two Out of
Three architecture, (c) the Double Two Out of Two architecture.


attackers, although the fault-tolerance traces its origins to the concept of
reliability [43]. The wide application of computers brings the increase of
software and operation systems. In order to develop safe software ar­
chitecture techniques, the European standard EN 50129 “Railway ap­
plications-Software for railway control and protection systems” [44] is
proposed which specifies procedures and technical requirements for the
development of programmable electronic systems which are used in
railway control and protection application. However, the security issues
are not completely considered during the development procedure of
software besides the information exchange process, as the current
railway signalling systems pay more attentions on the function safety.

On the other hand, the railway signalling systems apply the com­
mercial Operating Systems (OS) including Linux and Window, which
are known to have vulnerabilities as the authentication access control,
fine-grained file system protection, or memory isolation mechanisms
cannot be provided [45]. For some specific applications, the VxWorks is
applied where timing constraints are important such as ATP and ZC

[46,47]. The operating systems may not tolerate typical information
technology security practices as it is difficult to upgrade in an opera­
tional control system network [48].



10


_Z. Yu, H. Wang and F. Chen_ _High-speed Railway 1 (2023) 6–17_


**Table 2**
Impacts and difculties of potential attacks.

Attack Type Impact Difficulties of implementation


Passive Attack Eavesdropping Attack Confidentiality Easy
Traffic analysis attacks Confidentiality Relatively hard (The network of CBTC systems is closed)
Active Attack DoS Availability Easy
DDoS Availability Hard (There are not enough resource of CBTC systems to perform DDoS Attacks)
Tampering attacks Integrity Hard (The safety protocol is hard to be duplicated)
Masquerade attack Integrity Hard (The safety protocol is hard to be duplicated and the cross validation is hard to be bypassed)
Replay Attack Availability Relatively hard (The time stamp is needed to be validated)



**3. Types of attacks**


In the section, we discuss a variety of attacks on the CBTC systems
and their attributes. The Information Assurance Technical Framework
Forum (IATFF) has defined five general classer of information assurance
attacks including passive, active, close-in, insider and distribution [38].
As CBTC systems adopt wireless communications as the main method of
train-ground communications and are distributed in a large area, there
are lots of opportunities for malicious attackers to perform their attacks.
Technically, we divide all attacks into two types: passive and active.
Firstly, we summarize the attacks in terms of their impacts on CBTC
systems and the difficulties of implementation as show in Table 2.


_3.1. Passive attacks_


We consider two typical kinds of passive attacks: eavesdropping
attacks and traffic analysis attacks.

Eavesdropping attacks: Generally, the train-ground wireless com­
munications are encrypted, but the data transmission of wire commu­
nications is in plaintext. As a result, the malicious attackers can
eavesdrop the control information and the status information of trains.
The data mining could be used to decrypt the data, which can obtain
the important railway line data and the data formats. For example, the
Qinghai-Tibet line plays an important strategic role for the Southwest of
China, which means the line data is related to the national security, and
the eavesdropping attack can bring the reduction of confidentiality of
CBTC systems. In the other hand, when the data formats are obtained
by the attackers, it is easy to perform the active attacks, which could
send some false control commands and the safety and efficiency of train
operation could be affected. Therefore, eavesdropping attacks could be
the preparation for active attacks.

Traffic analysis attacks: As CBTC is a complex system, the volume of
the transmitted information among sub- systems is huge. The traffic
analysis attacks can get the characteristics of data transmission of dif­
ferent nodes, and the behavioral features can be obtained through data
mining. It helps the malicious attackers to analyze the vulnerabilities of
systems or networks. As a result, the weakest node can be selected as
the attacking target, which can minimize the cost of attackers and in­
crease the probability of the successful attack.

Therefore, passive attacks can affect the confidentiality of CBTC
systems, where national security data is embedded. In addition, passive
attacks can obtain the rules of systems through artificial intelligence
when amounts of data is captured, which could be treated as the pre­
lude of the active attacks. As passive attacks are hardly to be detected
and are easy to be performed, there are difficulties to efficiently defense
passive attacks.


_3.2. Active attacks_


Different from the passive attacks, active attacks can directly act on
the communication link, the computer or the node, which may cause the
interruption of the communication link, the latency of information
transmission, and the corruption or masquerade of the transmitted
packets. The availability, integrity and confidentiality of CBTC systems



could be affected. Generally, the current typical kinds of active attacks are
derived from IT systems, and there are five steps to perform active attacks

[49,50], where the second step is to perform passive attacks to determine
the attacking target. Now, we will discuss various active attacks in in­
formation security system and their properties. Active attacks usually
include Denial of Service (DoS) attack, Distributed Denial of Service
(DDoS) attack, tampering attack, camouflage, replay attack and so on.

 - [Denial of Service (DoS) attacks can stop the proper function of the ]
cyber physical system in order to disable the entire ICS. The com­
munication links are often selected as the attacking target, and some
software running on ICS nodes can be disabled by the DoS attack on
the cyber space. As a result, the control process, data logging and
communications could be affected [51]. A typical DoS attack can
bring some important subsystems offline and could trigger the target
ICS shutdown. Due to the application of fault-safe principles, when
the DoS attacks are acted on the CBTC system, e.g. the wireless
train-ground communications, if the interruption time is larger than
the predefined value, the emergency braking decision will be per­
formed immediately for urban rail transit systems while the CTCS-3
mode switches to CTCS-2 and the running speed is lowered for high
speed railway systems. If the DoS attack is performed by the em­
ployee of railway operators, some critical devices could be affected,
such as the Centralized Traffic Control (CTC) and Temporary Speed
Restriction Server (TSRS). If the congestion is caused by DoS, the
TSPS cannot send the temporary speed to the RBC on time, some
accidents could be caused. In fact, DoS attack cannot be efficiently
solved and it is the preferred technique for attackers. [52] which
was of enormous significance in the Ukraine power outage events.

 - [Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) is defined as a ”variant of the ]
denial-of-service attack that uses a coordinated attack from a dis­
tributed system of computers rather than from a signal source. It
often makes use of worms to spread to multiple computers that can
then attack the target” by the U.S. GAO (2005b) [53]. DDoS attacks
are the bugbear of Internet in 2011, but require dozens to millions of
infected devices under coordinated control. DDoS attacks are less of
a direct threat to ICS compared with DoS attacks unless nodes of the
ICS use the open Internet for command and control [54]. The main
objective of DDoS attacks is to destroy the service of system through
consuming network bandwidth by sending huge amounts of traffic
or the victim’s memory and computational resources by exploiting
an inherent protocol or implementation vulnerability [55].

 - [Tampering attacks mean that the legal data is modified, delayed or ]
reordered by some unauthorized actions. As CBTC is a data-driven
system, the line data, the running state of trains, the timetable are
all needed to keep the continuity of operation and the integrity of
data is critical important. Although the RSSP is applied in railway
systems, a successful tempering attack is possible, and the RSSP
specification is public and easy to be understood by the malicious
attackers. On the other hand, the application of wireless commu­
nication increases the probability of the success of data tempering.
As mentioned in [56], there are two kinds of tampering attacks:
environment tamper and physical tampering. The adversary can
tamper with the sensor deployment area or compromise the sensor



11


_Z. Yu, H. Wang and F. Chen_ _High-speed Railway 1 (2023) 6–17_



nodes and obtain the data and other keying material.

 - [A masquerade attack uses a fake identity to gain unauthorized ac­]

cess to the control computer information through legitimate access
identification [57]. Masquerade attacks are extremely serious,
especially in the case of an insider who can cause considerable da­
mage to an ICS, which means masquerade attacks can be very
dangerous because adversaries can launch other attacks and can still
hide and project themselves as legitimate nodes [58]. As the CBTC
systems uses amount of COTS technologies, e.g. TCP/IP, Ethernet,
Commercial Operation Systems, the risks of masquerade attacks are
more obvious, especially the application of WLANs [59] for urban
rail transit systems.

 - [A replay attack means a malicious user can store the intercepted ]
legitimate data frames and then constantly plays back the captured
data to the destination port [60]. Replay attacks do not require a
good understanding of the communications protocol, which means a
captured command can be replayed even if it is encrypted. The
purpose of the replay attacks is to perform a legitimate function in
abnormal conditions or at an inappropriate time, which could cause
bad consequences in CBTC systems [61].


Although there are few cyber security related mechanisms in the de­
signs of CBTC system, the fault-safe designs can restrict the propagation of
cyber security risks. The crossing validation of the critical data will mi­
tigate the probabilities of successful tampering attacks and masquerade
attacks. However, in order to guard the safety of train operation, the at­
tacks leading to the modification and delay of data might force the train
stop which can bring the reduction of operation efficiency. As a result, a
single form of attack may not violate the safety principles of CBTC sys­
tems and accidents could not be caused. However, with the development
of computer technology and communication technology, the coordinate
attacks could be developed to disrupt the specific system, which have
been applied at the Iran Nuclear Power plant and the Ukraine power
outage events. Therefore, detecting the attacks and responding quickly
are very important for CBTC systems facing the cyber security risks, and
the continuity of service could be guarded.


**4. Security protection strategies**


Communications provide the data transmission channels for CBTC
systems, which is implemented using straightforward principles such as
COTS products, open standards, standalone network operation, and
compliance to relevant network security and communication standards

[62]. As a result, some vulnerabilities of CBTC systems are brought and
some security protection strategies have been applied. However, as
there is no deep understanding of CBTC security principles, the popular
security solutions are generally acted on the transmission systems,
which means the security protection is limited. In the section, we will
discuss a few popular engineering security protection strategies, which
are shown as Table 3.


_4.1. Secure communications_


As mentioned in [63], the technical threats to security of wireless
train-ground communications are summarized, wave interference at the


**Table 3**
The popular engineering security protection strategies.



physical layer, jamming at the physical layer or the network layer,
sniffing at the network layer, deletion and insertion at the MAC layer or
network layer, forgery at the MAC layer or network layer, etc. Jamming
and interference are easily to be performed, as a result, Wyner [64]
proposed a securing communication method to make the eavesdropper’s channel is worse than the legitimate receiver’s channel. Therefore,
authors of [65] developed a physical layer secure wireless commu­
nications scheme under beamforming with artificial noise for high
speed railway systems, where adding artificial noise to the information
stream does not degrade the intended receiver’s channel, but generates
interference at the eavesdropper’s channel.

In order to avoid spoofing which can realize false command injec­
tion, the encryption technology should be applied. However, the
wireless communications across the Advanced Train Control Systems
(ATCS) links are not encrypted and not signed, which shows amounts of
security risks [13]. The transportation engineering company ARINC
gave preliminary recommendations to add encryption to the ATCS Spec
200 on April, 2001 by using a symmetric key encryption system based
on the Tiny Encryption Algorithm (TEA) with a 128- bit key. Later, they
suggested using Data Encryption Standard (DES) instead of TEA and
proposed Project 25, which is a standard for wireless communication
systems operating at OSI layer 2. Paul et al. [66] introduced a secure
ATCS (SATCS) to overcome the existing drawback of ARINC’s ATCS
encryption protocol. SATCS operates at OSI layer 2 and uses 128-bit
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES). This protocol allows encrypting
more of the packet, including message type and a wider range of data.
Other protocols could be used as well. TCP/IP over 802.11 or CDMA
would reduce engineering expenses, as this protocol is well-known.
There are many ways of encrypting TCP/IP communications. The
above-mentioned method would prevent attackers from obtaining de­
tailed train movement information and sending commands that would
made an unsafe state of train transportation. As the security mechanism
provide by the original 802.11 standard through the Wired Equivalent
Privacy (WEP) encryption algorithm proved relatively easy to crack, the
802.11 is developed to add stronger encryption, authentication and key
management methods to guarantee data and system security [67]. Due
to the characteristics of wireless communications, handoff procedure is
the bottlenet of the performance of train-ground communications. In
addition, it is also the key part of securing communications. For WLANbased CBTC train-ground communications, the Extensible Authentica­
tion Protocol over LANs (EAPOL) mechanism is applied to enhance the
reliability of handoffs, which is comprised of four-way and the group
key handshakes (IEEE std 802.1X. 2004).


_4.2. Firewall_


The information technology is widely applied in railway systems in
order to improve the operation efficiency, where there is a large net­
work covering the whole railway lines and stations such as the Train
Operation Dispatching Command System/Centralized Traffic Control
System (TDCS/CTC) of the high speed railway systems and the ATS for
urban rail transit systems. TDCS/CTC adopts amount of traditional IT
products including general-purpose computers, protocols and operation
systems. Therefore, the TDCS/CTC or ATS network cannot absolutely
isolate from the outside world. For mitigating the security risks, the



Security protection strategies Effects Location


Securing Communications The physical layer securing channel Generate interference at the eavesdropper’s channel wireless communication
Encryption Improve the integrity and confidentiality of communication wireless communication
Authentication Protocol Enhance the reliability of handoffs wireless communication
Safety Protocol (RSSP) Increase the safety of information exchange Communication
Firewall Mitigate the security risks from the outside of CBTC systems TDCS/CTC/ATS
Intrusion Detection/Prevention Monitor the security risks Communication


12


_Z. Yu, H. Wang and F. Chen_ _High-speed Railway 1 (2023) 6–17_



firewall is generally used to secure network access control and prevent
the intrusion into the internal network. As mentioned in [68], there are
several commercial and open-source firewalls can be successfully used
in the industrial control systems. Firewalls in ICS can provide condition
monitoring and analysis functions, support some general control pro­
tocols and satisfy high real-time requirements. As a matter of facts, the
application of firewalls in CBTC systems is the same as that of tradi­
tional IT systems, which means the firewall can only protect the
transmission and communication subsystems. Generally, with the
complete configuration, the firewalls can realize packet filtering, net­
work intrusion detection, address translation, web filtering, worms
protection and DOS/DDOS protection. The network intrusion detection
of firewalls are oriented from the traditional IT system, which can bring
real-time detection alarms and network scanning prevention. The
worms protection can block the virus and fake packets from the worms.
Therefore, the application of firewalls can keep the normal operation of
ICS networks.


_4.3. Intrusion detection/prevention_


Some intrusion detection/prevention methods are developed as
complementary to firewalls to monitor the security risks, e.g. the Deep
Packet Inspection (DPI) technology [69]. However, the general intru­
sion detection methods are designed for transmission or communication
networks. As there are many ICT COTS devices and technology applied
in CBTC systems, the general intrusion detection method are adopted in
the transmission channel to prevent some typical IT attacks.

[70,71], which is the same as the strategy of electricity Grid at the
early stage of the cyber security research. In the recent ten years,
electricity grid has been attacked many times and some accidents
caused serious consequences such as the SQL Slammer worm attack on
the nuclear plant in January 2003 [72]. According to [73], the existing
studies on the security of the smart grid are categorized into three ca­
tegories: dealing with the wired/wireless network security among cyber
components, investigating the early detection of anomalies in the smart
grid system and applying the control theories in the security process
using various state estimation and detection techniques. The security
strategy can learn the experience from Smart Grid. Generally, the in­
trusion detection methods belong to the first category of the smart grid
research.


**5. Challenges of CBTC cyber security**


The cyber security of CBTC systems has caused broad attention from
the government, colleges and equipment firms. Due to the special fea­
tures of CBTC systems, there are some challenges considering the se­
curity issues.


_5.1. The relationship between safety and security_


CBTC systems are safety-critical, which has the high requirements
for Reliability, Availability, Maintainability and Safety (RAMS). As the
goal of CBTC systems is to carry passengers to their destinations, the
priority of safety is higher than other attributes. Therefore, the fail-safe
designs are broadly applied in CBTC systems. When some events af­
fecting the normal operation of trains with minor probability, the train
has to stop in order to keep safe and the operation service is terminated
immediately. However, ‘Safety’ often considers the normal failure of
devices, equipment or subsystems, which can be described by prob­
abilities or other stochastic processes.

‘Security’ considers the human factors which means there are some
malicious attacks affecting the system in order to achieve their political,
economic or other goals. When the train stops, they succeed, as the
operation service of the whole lines could be suspended which cause
the reduction of trusts on the railway system and the waste of railway
capacity. As a result, determining the relationship between safety and



security is the core to keep the operation service continuity of CBTC
systems because security may not affect the safety but the efficiency.
For example, the DoS attacks on train- ground communications cannot
cause the safety issues, but the emergency braking of the train happens
due to the fail- safe designs when the interruption time of commu­
nications is beyond the threshold. Nevertheless, if the attack is quickly
detected and the system can determine the attack cannot affect safety,
the emergency braking is not necessary and the train can switch into
backup mode which does not use the wireless communication. As a
result, the operation service continues which will not bring passengers
to be exhausted and the train orderliness can be guarded. More im­
portantly, the attacks cannot achieve their goals which means the
prevention is effective. Therefore, analyzing the relationship between
safety and security is the pre-condition to do the other security mon­
itoring and prevention works.

Generally, safety and security share many similarities and the main
difference between safety and security is origin of risk [74]. System
failures are often considered by safety analysis while the threats are
involved by security analysis where the threats are basically involved
with human factors. The security issues are not originally considered in
CBTC systems and the corresponding security analysis is not performed
by railway employees and operators. However, the safety analysis of
CBTC systems is always a point of CBTC due to its safety-critical
properties, and there are many valuable works which can help us to
determine the hazards and safety risks propagation principles of CBTC
systems. As there are being lack of valuable security research results of
CBTC systems, the research on CBTC security issues should learn from
the successful experience of CBTC safety issues based on the simila­
rities. There are four categories of methods: the event chain based
method, the failure logic based method, the state- based method and
the system theory method. The event chain based method is easy to be
performed and still a popular approach for safety analysis. The basis of
event chain based method is the linear causality to determine its con­
stitution of the chain and the typical tools include Fault Tree (FT)

[75,76] and Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA) [77–79]. The
failure logic based method is to deal with the high complexity and large
scale computer systems, which uses the layering failure logic modules
to model the large scale system, and the typical tools include Hier­
archically Performed Hazard and Origin and Propagation Studies (HiPHOPS) [80,81] and Failure Propagation and Transformation Notation
(FPTN) [82,83]. The state based method applies the set theory and logic
symbols to describe the system state, where the formal verification is
also used to test the system model. As the formal model illustrates the
state evolution process with or without system failures, it is an efficient
method to perform automated safety assessment and the popular tools
include NuSMV [84,85] and UPPAAL [86]. A typical system theory
method is Systems-Theoretic Accident Model and Process (STAMP) [87]
proposed by Nancy Leveson, which treats the whole system as a hier­
archical architecture. Based on STAMP, the Causal Analysis based on
STAMP (CAST) [88] and the System-Theoretic Process Analysis (STPA)

[89] are derived and applied in many safety-critical systems including
aerospace, transportation, chemistry and medicine. Based on the
methods above, the safety analysis researches on CBTC systems are
performed. The fault tree is adopted to build a safety risk model for
railway systems, which provides an understanding of the nature and
distribution of the current risk on signalling systems [90]. Niu [91] uses
FPTN to perform the automatic safety analysis of computer-based
railway signalling system, which describes the failure propagation of
the CBTC system used in Beijing Subway Yizhuang Line. NuSMV is
chosen to check the bounded model of safety rules for a subway control
software and it is present as a feasible tool for model checking [92].
Nowadays, STAMP is widely applied in safety analysis of railway sig­
nalling systems. The China-Jiaoji railway accident is taken as an ex­
ample to be analyzed using STAMP, which is more effective to under­
stand the accident reason than the other methods [93]. In addition, the
same work has been done about the China-Yongwen accident [94].



13


_Z. Yu, H. Wang and F. Chen_ _High-speed Railway 1 (2023) 6–17_



All the work mentioned above focuses on the effects of equipment
failures on the railway safety. As the human factor is the main differ­
ence between safety and security, it is hard to model the human factor
including the motivation, attack cost, probability of success of a given
attack and the likelihood that an attacker will try a given attack. Due to
the importance of security for railway systems, the comprehensive as­
sessment of security with safety is necessary, which is also an effective
method to determine the relationship between safety and security.
There are some hybrid approaches proposed to perform the combina­
tion of safety and security analysis [95] using component fault trees and
attack trees, where both the qualitative and quantitative analysis have
been done. The same method is also proposed for the European Railway
Traffic Management System (ERTMS) [96], where the authentication
protocol of the Eurobalise subsystem is taken as the research object and
the security hazards from attackers are converted as the hazards of
Security Module. However, the cases of [95] and [96] do not consider
the whole system but focus on the subsystem or equipment, which
means there are difficulties to describe the effects of security on the
safety from the view of the system. As a result, the systems- theoretic
approach e.g. STPA is more effective to assess the safety and security

[97,98], which can describe the goal of security efforts on controlling
system vulnerabilities. As the system is modeled as a hierarchical
structure with constraints on the component behavior from the higher
level at the lower level in system theory, the detailed control me­
chanisms and operation principle can be included. Therefore, the re­
lationship between safety and security can be built, which is still a
complicated work. However, there are not valuable works on the
comprehensive assessment of safety and security for CBTC systems. As
the systems-theoretic approach can deal with the state space explosion
which is the limitation of the event chain method, it could be an ap­
propriate way to model the relationship between safety and security
which can efficiently perform the comprehensive assessment of safety
and security.


_5.2. Resilience as the assessment indicator_


As there are not enough research about the cyber security of CBTC
systems, it is a question to measure the security level. In the traditional
assessment of CBTC systems, the Reliability, Availability,
Maintainability and Safety (RAMS) are the four significant indicators,
where the statistics is applied as the qualitative measure, such as the
failure probabilities, Mean Time to Failure (MTTF), Mean Time be­
tween Failures (MTBF), two-dimension risk matrices (risk probabilities
and risk consequences). Therefore, the traditional function assessment
focuses on the large time scale, which cannot evaluate the effects
caused by the temporal or sudden disruption. However, security events
are often unexpected based on fully preparation. As a result, the sta­
tistics indicators are not appropriate to describe the security con­
sequences. Facing the new requirements for the assessment of CBTC
systems especially the security issues, some new concepts, indicators or
metrics should be proposed. Cybersecurity events can be treated as the
disruption on the normal operation. Hence, resilience is proposed to
perform the risk assessment to improve safety, security, and quality of
service [99].

Resilience is a popular concept which has been defined in many
different ways. In ecological systems, resilience is defined as the per­
sistence of systems and of their ability to absorb change and disturbance
which could help the system maintain the same relationships between
population or state variables [100]. For economics, the resilience is also
proposed to be the ability under normal circumstances and in crisis
situations due to ingenuity or extra effort [101]. From the view of
engineering [102], resilience is the ability to recognize and handle
unanticipated perturbations that could lead to a shift of processes,
strategies and coordination. There are difficulties to describe the resi­
lience and it cannot be measured by a single metric, but depend on the
multi-dimension ones which are the ultimate multidimensional outputs



(the consequences) of the system for any specific inputs (threats) [103].
Considering the security issues, the state of system could be changed.
However, the goal of attackers is to cause trains stops (emergency
braking), economical losses, the loss of trust on railways and human
casualties. As a result, based on the definition of resilience and the
objective of attackers, we should use the state of physical space to de­
scribe the resilience of CBTC systems, as it is a typical cyber-physical
system [104]. Because the operation goal of railway systems is to meet
the travel requirements of passengers, the state of physical space is
directly related with the operation Quality of Service (QoS) of CBTC
systems, which may be defined by a wide range of attributes influenced
by planning authorities and transport operators [105]. Obviously, the
CBTC QoS concerns about time which is a direct measure to assess the
transport service of railway systems, which could be determined by
several attributes of the system including dwell time, travelling time,
the headway and access time. Therefore, resilience of CBTC systems
adopts the state of physical space to measure the system QoS when
security events happen. According to some research about the QoS of
railway systems, the seat comfort and bed services are considered

[106]. However, the security issues of CBTC systems basically affect the
physical state which is also the ultimate goal of adversaries.

Compared with the traditional RAMS indicators, resilience is ap­
propriate to describe the effects of security, which can reflect on CBTC
QoS. In addition, resilience is a multi- dimension variable which is
varying with the change of the security process. As a result, the resi­
lience can illustrate the security situation of CBTC system before se­
curity attacks, during the security process and after the security stra­
tegies applied. As mentioned in ENSIA (European Union’s Network and
Information Security Agency) report about the cyber security of IPT
(Intelligent Public Transportation) [107], degraded modes of operation
contributes to enhancing the resilience of the IPT system by ensuring a
minimum level of service, which also uses the QoS to define resilience.
In addition, the resilience is defined as the combination of four prop­
erties: robustness, redundancy, resourcefulness and rapidity [108].
Therefore, using resilience as the security indicator is efficient to assess
the level of the CBTC security protection strategies, the robustness of
the CBTC system under the attack, the response capability facing the
security issues and the recovery capability of CBTC systems under the
attacks. Hence, the indicator can give guidance for the enhancement of
the security prevention of CBTC systems, which provides the overall
security situational awareness of CBTC systems.


_5.3. Security risk management_


Security risk management is proposed to consist of threat analysis,
risk assessment, loss expectancy, potential safeguards, and risk miti­
gation analysis [109]. In fact, the security prevention strategies should
be applied during the life-cycle of an industrial control system, which
means the corresponding protection mechanism should be triggered as
soon as possible when the security attacks are perceived. Therefore, the
vulnerabilities should be analyzed and summarized, the security risks
should be monitored accurately and timely, and the suitable protection
method should be selected and immediately applied. Therefore, the
National Institution of Standards and Technology (NIST) developed a
guidance for applying the risk management framework focusing on the
life cycle for information systems [110] and industrial control systems

[48] respectively, where [48] proposed the same idea as [109]. Hence,
the security risk management process of CBTC systems has three com­
ponents: assessing, responding and monitoring. Assessing can give the
vulnerabilities and threats, where the corresponding priority and con­
sequence should be evaluated with the determination of attacking
paths. Based on the assessment results, the monitoring objects and at­
tributes can be determined which can assure the accuracy and time­
liness of monitoring. The monitoring should provide the real-time se­
curity situation, the features of attacks and the devices or subsystems
under attacks for responding, which can help to perform the best



14


_Z. Yu, H. Wang and F. Chen_ _High-speed Railway 1 (2023) 6–17_



response mechanisms. The performance of response strategies on the
system should be assessed, and the response strategies can be amended
according to the assessment results in order to achieve the best security
risk management effects.

Generally, the assessment should be performed based on the design
details of CBTC systems including the hardware and software platforms,
the operation systems, the application software developed by the sig­
naling engineers, the database, the network architecture, the commu­
nication protocols and the management mechanisms, which means the
key secret information should be got by the assessment engineers.
Therefore, it is a huge challenge for a third party assessment as most of
the needed information cannot be public. As a result, a successful se­
curity assessment of CBTC system requires the cooperation of the sig­
naling firms and the assessment agency. However, the execution of
assessment should depend on the index system, and the resilience
mentioned above can be considered, which can give more reasonable
and practical conclusions.

The security risk monitoring is the key step to deal with the attacks
which may be launched with a long time preparation. As a result, the
critical equipment of CBTC systems could be affected and the final re­
sults can be demonstrated on the states of trains. Therefore, designing
the monitoring mechanisms for the whole CBTC system is a challenge,
which should provide the detail information of attacks as much as
possible including the type of attacks, the vulnerabilities being utilized
and the possible consequences. However, the security risk monitoring
depends on the performance of intrusion detection algorithms. As
mentioned above, the CBTC system is hybrid and of great complexity.
In order to achieve the best monitoring performance, the monitoring
objects should be determined which could be also of high complexity.
Traditionally, the monitoring mechanism is acted on the transmission
network and the communication system. Nevertheless, from the view of
operators and signaling firms, the deployment of monitoring equipment
will increase the complexity of the CBTC system, which could cause
some unpredictable event including the interruption of message trans­
mission and the decrease of timeliness performance due to the limita­
tion of dedicated railway protocols and inadequate installation strate­
gies. As a result, selecting the key monitoring objects and designing an
appropriate deployment method are significant to enhancement the
security level of CBTC systems with the operation efficiency guaran­
teed.

The security risk responding is to execute the specific solutions ac­
cording to the results of assessing and monitoring. Generally, there are
candidate solutions which need to be selected based on the character­
istics of CBTC systems. The goal of security risk responding is to block
the propagation of security risks which could lead to the reduction of
operation efficiency and accidents. As mentioned above, the objective
of adversaries is to disrupt (stop) the service of CBTC systems or pro­
duce some accidents which can bring the economic, social or political
effects. Therefore, taking resilience as the criterion is proper to de­
termine the risk responding strategy. In order to achieve the best per­
formance, the dynamic security risk responding is necessary which
means the response strategy can be changed with the variance of attack.
Hence, the behavior of attackers should be predicted according to some
models. For network security, the attacker-defender game model is
proposed to be an efficient way realizing active defence [111,112],
which can generate protection strategies according to the QoS of CBTC
and the prediction of attacks.


_5.4. CBTC security testbed_


New security technologies should be verified as it is unclear and
unproven that these methods can scale to realistic CBTC systems, which
are developed in a lab environment. In addition, it is unknown that
whether the application of new technologies may cause the interruption
or other effects on the service of rail transportation systems and there is
not a typical security testbed for CBTC systems. However, testbeds are



widely developed in Smart Grid, such as CPSG, SGPS, USF, INEL and
NREL which are listed in [113]. A proper testbed can help to find cyber
security vulnerabilities, perform evaluations and execute verifications.
As a result, designing a CBTC security testbed is significant to enhance
the security level of train control systems and an efficient way to verify
the availability of security technologies. According to the experiences of
industrial control systems, there are three testbed constructing plans

[114]: pure duplication, pure emulation and the hybrid way with du­
plication and emulation. Obviously, the pure duplication way can
provide the most comprehensive information of the targeting system
and give the most real parameters of the targeting system under the
security attacks. However, the best performance is achieved with the
high costs as the equipment of the testbed is the same as that used in the
real filed. Besides, the testbed built in the pure duplication way gen­
erally covers a large area. For CBTC systems, a pure duplication testbed
is hard to be built up as the train is running at the high speed and the
operation environment is too large. On the other hand, the pure emu­
lation way cannot describe the entire characteristics of CBTC systems as
the fault-tolerance architecture, the safe logics and the fail-safe me­
chanism are hard to be modeled. Therefore, the hybrid way with du­
plication and emulation is more proper to develop the CBTC security
testbed.

As mentioned above, CBTC system is data-driven which means in­
formation flow is the most important to the system. Therefore, ob­
taining the detailed data generation principles, the transmission me­
chanisms and the data processing logics are significant to determine the
threats and the vulnerabilities of the system. As a result, according to
the data evolution process, the critical devices or subsystems should be
duplicated with the same ones as the practical operation lines. As CBTC
is a typical cyber-physical system, it contains two major components, a
physical process and a cyber system [115]. Based on the features and
architecture of CBTC systems, except the rolling stock, almost all the
other train control equipment belongs to the cyber system. From Fig. 2,
the TDCS, ATS/CTC, VC/VOBC, RBC/ZC, CI are the critical parts, which
means the CBTC security testbed should adopt the real signalling
equipment. However, the train can use an emulation product, which
can generate the kinetic model and provide the comprehensive para­
meters of the train for the control equipment.


**6. Conclusions and future work**


CBTC is the most popular technology for railway transportations
and facing the more and more serious security situation. As one typical
industrial control system and the critical infrastructure, the security
risks of CBTC systems should be controlled and mitigated. Hence,
finding the security risk propagation principles, identifying the treats
and vulnerabilities, monitoring the security situation of CBTC systems,
responding the risks and performing the proper corresponding strate­
gies should be all realized. However, due to the closure and other
features, the security protection works acted on the CBTC systems are
limited. As there are few valuable researches about the railway security,
based on the research results of traditional IT systems and industrial
control systems, we summarized the significant security issues of CBTC
systems. We began our discussion with an overview of the CBTC se­
curity characteristics. In particular, the effects of security risks on the
CBTC system are analyzed including the safety and the operation effi­
ciency. We then discussed the possible potential attack and summarized
the current popular security protection strategies including the securing
communication, firewalls and intrusion detection/prevention. Finally,
we exploited some challenges of CBTC security research, where the
relationship between safety and security, resilience, security manage­
ment and testbed were discussed.

In summary, the research on CBTC security needs much more work
and there is still a long way ahead to enhance the security level of CBTC
systems due to some challenging issues. In the article, the state-of-theart in CBTC security is reviewed from both the engineering and the



15


_Z. Yu, H. Wang and F. Chen_ _High-speed Railway 1 (2023) 6–17_



research results as there is lack of enough theoretical supports for se­
curity issues of railway systems. The challenges proposed in the paper
can be beneficial for the future research of CBTC security.

**References**




[[1] X. Yang, H. Yin, J. Wu, et al., Recognizing the critical stations in urban rail net­](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref1)



[works: An analysis method based on the smart-card data, IEEE Intell. Trans. Sys.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref1)
[Mag. 11 (1) (2019) 29–35.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref1)

[[2] S. Peng, X. Yang, H. Wang, et al., Dispatching high-speed rail trains via utilizing](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref2)
[the reverse direction track: adaptive rescheduling strategies and application,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref2)
[Sustainability 11 (2019) 2351.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref2)

[[3] O.A. Alimi, K. Ouahada, Abu-Mahfouz, Real time security assessment of the power](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref3)
[system using a hybrid support vector machine and multilayer perceptron neural](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref3)
[network algorithms, Sustainability 11 (2019) 3586.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref3)

[[4] S.M. Wu, D. Guo, Y.J. Wu, et al., Future development of taiwan smart cities from](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref4)
[an information security perspective, Sustainability 10 (2018) 4520.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref4)

[5] R.T. Marsh et al., Critical foundations: Protecting Americas´ infrastructure,
Presidents´ Commission on Critical Infrastructure Protection, 1997.

[6] M. Chertoff, National infrastructure protection plan, tech. rep., Department of
Homeland Security, Washington, DC, 2009.

[7] NIPP 2013: Partnering for Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience, tech.
rep., Department of Homeland Security, Washington, DC, 2013.

[8] Transportation Systems Sector-Specific Plan - 2015, tech. rep., Department of
Homeland Security, Washington, DC, 2015.

[9] E. Commission et al., Critical infrastructure protection in the fight against ter­




[[33] M. Heddebaut, Leaky waveguide for train-to-wayside communication- based train](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref10)
[control, IEEE Trans. Veh. Tech. 58 (2009) 1068–1076.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref10)

[34] H. Wang, B. Ning, H. Jiang, An experimental study of 2.4GHz frequency band
leaky coaxial cable in cbtc train ground communication, in Proc. IEEE VTC 2011/
fall, (2011) 1–5.

[35] R.S. Gill, J. Smith, M.H. Looi, et al., Passive techniques for detecting session hijacking
attacks in ieee 802.11 wireless networks, in AusCERT Asia Pacific Information
Technology Security Conference, (Gold Coast, Australia), (2005) 26–38.

[[36] J.S. Park, D. Dicoi, Wlan security: current and future, IEEE Int. Comput. 7 (2003)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref11)
[60–65.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref11)

[[37] S.X.W.U. Hao, G. Yonghao, Research and improvement on security of gsm-r](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref12)
[system, J. Beijing Jiaotong Univ. 2 (2009) 127–130.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref12)

[[38] M.W. Hartong, Secure communications based train control (CBTC) operations](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref13)
[(PhD thesis), George Mason University, 2009.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref13)

[[39] C. Bantin, J. Siu, Designing a secure data communications system for automatic](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref14)
[train control, Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part F J. Rail Rapid Transit 225 (4) (2011)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref14)
[395–402.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref14)

[[40] J. Smith, S. Russell, M. Looi, Security as a safety issue in rail communications, in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref15)
_Proc. SCS ’03_ [, (Darlinghurst, Australia) (2003) 79–88.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref15)

[[41] Y. Cao, H.K. Lu, T. Wen, A safety computer system based on multi-sensor data](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref16)
[processing, Sensors 19 (4) (2019).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref16)

[[42] Y. Cao, Y.Z. Zhang, T. Wen, et al., Research on dynamic nonlinear input prediction](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref17)
[of fault diagnosis based on fractional differ- ential operator equation in high-speed](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref17)
[train control system, Chaos Interdiscip. J. Nonlinear Sci. 29 (1) (2019).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref17)

[[43] M. Al-Kuwaiti, N. Kyriakopoulos, S. Hussein, A comparative analysis of network](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref18)
[dependability, fault-tolerance, reliability, security, and survivability (Second),](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref18)
[IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 11 (2009) 106–124.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref18)

[[44] E. Cenelec, 50128: Railway applications-communication, signalling and proces­](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref19)

[sing systems-software for railway control and protection systems, Book EN 50128](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref19)
[(2012).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref19)

[[45] D. Dzung, M. Naedele, T.P.V. Hoff, et al., Security for industrial communication](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref20)
[systems, Proc. IEEE 93 (2005) 1152–1177.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref20)

[46] F. Yan, Studying formal methods applications in cbtc, in Proc. 2011 International
Conference on Management and Service Science, (2011) 1–3.

[47] Y. Xie, T. Tang, Performance analysis of communication network for the cbtc
system, in Proc. 2009 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, (2009)1072-1077.

[[48] K. Stouffer, J. Falco, K. Scarfone, Guide to industrial control systems (ICS) security,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref21)
[pp. 16–16, NIST Special Publ. 800 (82) (2011) 16.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref21)

[49] T. Tidwell, R. Larson, K. Fitch, et al., Modeling internet attacks, in Proceedings of
the 2001 IEEE Workshop on Information Assurance and security, 59 (2001).

[50] D. Icove, K. Seger, W. VonStorch, Computer crime: a crime- fighter’s handbook.
O’Reilly & Associates Sebastopol, CA, 1995.

[51] T.H. Morris, W. Gao, Industrial control system cyber attacks, in Proc. ICS-CSR
2013, (Leicester, UK), (2013) 22–29.

[52] S. Xin, X. Chen, H. Tang, et al., Research on dos atomic attack oriented to attack
resistance test, in Proc. ICNSC 08′, (2008) 1747–1752.

[[53] B. Newsome, A Practical Introduction to Security and Risk Management, SAGE](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref22)
[Publications, 2013.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref22)

[[54] T. Macaulay, B.L. Singer, Cybersecurity for industrial control systems: SCADA,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref23)
[DCS, PLC, HMI, and SIS, CRC Press, 2011.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref23)

[[55] V.A. Siris, I. Stavrakis, Provider-based deterministic packet marking against dis­](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref24)

[tributed dos attacks, J. Netw. Comp. Appl. 30 (3) (2007) 858–876.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref24)

[[56] A.A. Cardenas, T. Roosta, S. Sastry, Rethinking security properties, threat models,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref25)
[and the design space in sensor networks: a case study in SCADA systems, Ad Hoc](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref25)
[Netw. 7 (8) (2009) 1434–1447.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref25)

[[57] M.B. Salem, S. Stolfo, Masquerade attack detection using a search-behavior](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref26)
[modeling approach, tech. rep, Department of Computer Science, Columbia](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref26)
[University, New York, NY, USA, 2009.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref26)

[[58] S. Kumar, A. Anand, Saving wireless networks by detecting, and designing efficient](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref27)
[from masquerade attacks, Int. J. Sci. Technol. Res. 3 (2014).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref27)

[[59] I. Aldasouqi, W. Salameh, Detecting and localizing wireless network attacks](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref28)
[techniques, Intern. J. Comp. Sci. Security ((IJCSS)) 4 (1) (2010) 82.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref28)

[60] T. Bartman, K. Carson, A. Fair, Securing communications for scada and critical
industrial systems, in proceedings of the Power and Energy Automation
Conference, Spokane, WA, 2015.

[[61] A.S.K. Pathan, The state of the art in intrusion prevention and detection, CRC](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref29)
[press, 2014.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref29)

[[62] C.C. Bantin, J. Siu, Designing a secure data communications system for automatic train](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref30)
[control, Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part F J. Rail Rapid Transit 225 (4) (2011) 395–402.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref30)

[63] H. Jo, J. Baek, K. Lee, et al., Wireless security method for on-board centered train
control system, in Proc. ICCCT 12′, (2012) 88–93.

[[64] A.D. Wyner, The wire-tap channel, The Bell System Tech. J. 54 (8) (1975)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref31)
[1355–1387.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref31)

[65] C. Yaping, X. Fang, A physical layer secure wireless communication scheme for
high speed railway, in The Sixth International Workshop on Signal Design and Its
Applications in Communications, (2013) 114–117.

[66] P.V. Craven, S. Craven, Security of atcs wireless railway communications, in Proc.
ASME/IEEE Joint Rail Conference 05′, (2005) 227–238.

[67] C. Yap, E. Qi, K. Sood, et al., Issues with real-time streaming applications roaming in
qos-based secure IEEE 802.11 wlans, in Proc. Asia Pacific Conference on Mobile
Technology, Applications and Systems 05′, (2005) 1–7.

[68] E. Byres, B. Chauvin, J. Karsch, et al., The special needs of SCADA/PCN firewalls:
Architectures and test results, in Proc. ETFA 05′.

[69] A. Bremler-Barr, Y. Harchol, D. Hay, Space-time tradeoffs in software-based deep
packet inspection, in Proc. HPSR 11′, (2011) 1–8.



rorism, 2004.

[10] S. Bologna and R. Setola, The need to improve local self-awareness in CIP/CIIP in First
IEEE International Workshop on Critical Infrastructure Protection, (2005) 1–6.

[[11] R. Pascoe, T. Eichorn, What is communication-based train control? IEEE Veh.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref5)
[Tech. Mag. (2009) 16–21.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref5)

[12] H. Zhao, L. Zhu, H. Jiang, et al., Design and performance tests in an integrated TDLTE based train ground communication system, in Proc. ITSC ’14, (2014)
747–750.

[13] P. Craven, A brief look at railroad communication vulnerabilities, in The 7th
International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, (2004)
245–249.

[14] IEC, Industrial communication networks-network and system security-security for
industrial automation and control systems, IEC 62443, 2009.

[15] J. Braband, Towards an IT security framework for railway automation, in ERTS
2014, (Toulouse), 2014.

[16] DKE, Electric signalling systems for railways-part 104: IT Security Guideline based
on IEC 62443, 2015.

[17] J. Gronbaek, T. Madsen, H. Schwefel, Safe wireless communication solution for
driver machine interface for train control systems, in ICONS 08, (2008) 208–213.

[18] H.J. Jo, J.G. Hwang, S.K. Shin, et al., Safety guaranteeing method & tool devel­

opment in railway communication system, in INTELEC 09′, (2009) 1–5.

[19] J. Smith, S. Russell, M. Looi, Security as a safety issue in rail communications, in
SCS ’03, (Darlinghurst, Australia), (2003) 79–88.

[20] B. Malinowsky, H.P. Schwefel, O. Jung, Quantitative safety and security analysis
from a communication perspective, in The 8th International Conference on
Performance Evaluation Methodologies and Tools, (2014) 9–16.

[[21] L. Zhu, F. Yu, B. Ning, et al., Cross-layer handoff design in MIMO-enabled WLANs](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref6)
[for communication-based train control (CBTC) systems, IEEE J. Sel. Areas](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref6)
[Commun. 30 (2012) 719–728.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref6)

[22] IEEE, Standard for communications-based train control (CBTC) performance and
functional requirements, IEEE Std 1474.1–2004 (Revision of IEEE Std
1474.1–1999), (2004) 1–45.

[[23] W. Hao, S. Xiaohua, G. Yonghao, Research and improvement on security of GSM-R](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref7)
[system, J. Beijing Jiaotong Univ. 33 (2009) 127–130.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref7)

[24] X. Li, Q. Song, H. Tao, et al., Evaluation on anti-interference to WLAN equipments
for spatial deployment of CBTC systems in tunnels, in Proc ICCC’14, (2014) 47–52.

[25] Y. Hai, C. Yuetan, W. Hongyu, et al., Coexistence studies on the interference
performance between subway CBTC system and portable Wi-Fi devices, in ICNIDC’14, (2014) 191–195.

[26] C. Song, B. Han, H. Yu, et al., Study on coexistence and anti- interference solution
for subway CBTC system and MiFi devices, in IC-BNMT’13, (2013) 174–180.

[27] L. Bu, D. Xie, X. Chen, et al., Demo abstract: Bachol - modeling and verification of
cyber-physical systems online, in ICCPS ’12, (Washington, DC, USA), (2012) 222–222.

[28] E. 50159–1, Railway applications-communication, signaling and processing sys­



tems part 1: Safety-related communication in closed transmission systems,
CENELEC, 2001.

[29] E. 50159–2, Railway applications-communication, signaling and processing sys­



tems part 2: Safety-related communication in open transmission systems,
CENELEC, 2001.

[[30] H. Wang, F. Yu, L. Zhu, et al., Finite-state markov modeling for wireless channels](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref8)
[in tunnel communication-based train control systems, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref8)
[Syst. 15 (2014) 1083–1090.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref8)

[31] S. Lin, Z. Zhong, L. Cai, et al., Finite state Markov modelling for high speed railway
wireless communication channel, in Proc. IEEE Globecom’12, (Anaheim, CA,
USA), Dec. 2012.

[[32] H. Wang, F. Yu, L. Zhu, et al., Modeling of communication-based train control](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref9)
[(cbtc) radio channel with leaky waveguide, Antennas and Wireless Propagation](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref9)
[Letters, IEEE 12 (2013) 1061–1064.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref9)



16


_Z. Yu, H. Wang and F. Chen_ _High-speed Railway 1 (2023) 6–17_




[70] R. Bloomfield, M. Bendele, P. Bishop, et al., The risk assessment of ertms-based
railway systems from a cyber security perspective: Methodology and lessons
learned, in International Conference on Reliability, Safety and Security of Railway
Systems, Springer, (2016) 3–19.

[71] A. Carlson, D. Frincke, M. Laude, Railway security issues: A survey of developing
railway technology, in Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer,
Communications and Control Technologies, 1 (2003) 1–6.

[[72] F. Pasqualetti, F. Dorfler, F. Bullo, Attack detection and identification in cyber-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref32)
[physical systems, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 58 (2013) 2715–2729.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref32)

[[73] K. Manandhar, X. Cao, F. Hu, et al., Detection of faults and attacks including false](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref33)
[data injection attack in smart grid using kalman filter, IEEE Trans. Control Net.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref33)
[Syst. 1 (2014) 370–379.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref33)

[[74] S. Kriaa, L. Pietre-Cambacedes, M. Bouissou, et al., A survey of approaches com­](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref34)

[bining safety and security for industrial control systems, Reliability Eng. & Syst.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref34)
[Saf. 139 (2015) 156–178.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref34)

[[75] A.N. Gharahasanlou, A. Mokhtarei, A. Khodayarei, et al., Fault tree analysis of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref35)
[failure cause of crushing plant and mixing bed hall at khoy cement factory in iran,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref35)
[Case Stud. Eng. Fail. Anal. 2 (1) (2014) 33–38.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref35)

[[76] F.A. Rahman, A. Varuttamaseni, M. Kintner-Meyer, et al., Application of fault tree](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref36)
[analysis for customer reliability assessment of a distribution power system,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref36)
[Reliability Eng. Syst. Saf. 111 (2013) 76–85.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref36)

[[77] J. Trafialek, W. Kolanowski, Application of failure mode and effect analysis](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref37)
[(FMEA) for audit of haccp system, Food Control 44 (2014) 35–44.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref37)

[[78] G.Y. Park, D.H. Kim, D.Y. Lee, Software fmea analysis for safety-related applica­](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref38)

[tion software, Ann. Nucl. Energy 70 (2014) 96–102.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref38)

[[79] H.R. Feili, N. Akar, H. Lotfizadeh, et al., Risk analysis of geothermal power plants](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref39)
[using failure modes and effects analysis (FMEA) technique, Energy Convers.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref39)
[Manag. 72 (2013) 69–76.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref39)

[80] Y. Papadopoulos, J. McDermid, A new method for safety analysis and the mechanical
synthesis of fault trees in complex systems, in Proc. ICSSEA 99′, 4 (1999) 1–9.

[81] Y. Papadopoulos, J.A. McDermid, Hierarchically performed hazard origin and
propagation studies, in International Conference on Computer Safety, Reliability,
and Security, Springer, (1999) 139–152.

[82] P. Fenelon, J.A. McDermid, Integrated techniques for software safety analysis, in
IEE Colloquium on Hazard Analysis, IET, (1992) 2–1.

[[83] P. Fenelon, J.A. McDermid, An integrated tool set for software safety analysis, J.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref40)
[Syst. Softw. 21 (3) (1993) 279–290.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref40)

[[84] K.Y. Koh, P.H. Seong, Smv model-based safety analysis of software requirements,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref41)
[Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 94 (2) (2009) 320–331.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref41)

[[85] C. Eisner, Model checking the garbage collection mechanism of smv, Electron.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref42)
[Notes Theor. Comput. Sci. 55 (3) (2001) 289–303.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref42)

[[86] D. Soliman, K. Thramboulidis, G. Frey, Transformation of function block diagrams](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref43)
[to uppaal timed automata for the verification of safety applications, Ann. Rev.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref43)
[Control 36 (2) (2012) 338–345.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref43)

[[87] N. Leveson, A new accident model for engineering safer systems, Saf. Sci. 42 (4)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref44)
[(2004) 237–270.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref44)

[[88] N. Leveson, Engineering a safer world: Systems thinking applied to safety, Mit](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref45)
[Press, 2011.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref45)

[89] N.G. Leveson, A new approach to hazard analysis for complex systems, in
International Conference of the System Safety Society, 2003.

[[90] R. Muttram, Railway safety’s safety risk model, Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part F J. Rail](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref46)
[Rapid Transit 216 (2) (2002) 71–79.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref46)

[91] R. Niu, T. Tang, O. Lisagor, et al., Automatic safety analysis of of computer-based
railway signalling system, in Proc. SOLI 11′, (2011) 484–490.

[[92] N.G. Ferreira, P.S.M. Silva, Automatic verification of safety rules for a subway](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref47)
[control software, Electron. Notes Theor. Comput. Sci. 130 (2005) 323–343.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref47)

[[93] M. Ouyang, L. Hong, M.H. Yu, et al., Stamp-based analysis on the railway accident](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref48)
[and accident spreading: Taking the China Jiaoji railway accident for example,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref48)
[Safety Sci. 48 (5) (2010) 544–555.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref48)




[94] T. Song, D. Zhong, H. Zhong, A stamp analysis on the China- yongwen railway
accident, in International Conference on Computer Safety, Reliability, and
Security, Springer, (2012) 376–387.

[95] M. Steiner, P. Liggesmeyer, Combination of safety and security analysis - finding
security problems that threaten the safety of a system, in SAFECOMP 13′ (M. ROY,
ed.), (France), p. NA, 2013.

[96] S. Bezzateev, N. Voloshina, P. Sankin, Joint safety and security analysis for com­

plex systems, in Proceedings of the 13th conference of FRUCT association,
Petrozavodsk, Russia, 2013.

[[97] W. Young, N.G. Leveson, An integrated approach to safety and security based on](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref49)
[systems theory, Commun. ACM 57 (2014) 31–35.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref49)

[98] W. Young, N. Leveson, Systems thinking for safety and security, in Proc. ACSAC
’13, (New York, NY, USA), ACM, (2013) 1–8.

[[99] S.O. Johnsen, M. Veen, Risk assessment and resilience of critical commu­](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref50)

[nication infrastructure in railways, Cognition, Technol. Work 15 (1) (2013)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref50)
[95–107.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref50)

[[100] C.S. Holling, Resilience and stability of ecological systems, Annual Rev. Ecol.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref51)
[Systematics 4 (1973) 1–23.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref51)

[[101] A. Rose, S.Y. Liao, Modeling regional economic resilience to disasters: a compu­](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref52)

[table general equilibrium analysis of water service disruptions, J. Regional Sci. 45](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref52)
[(1) (2005) 75–112.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref52)

[[102] D.D. Woods, M. Branlat, Essential characteristics of resilience, Resil. Eng. Conc.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref53)
[Precepts (2012) 127–143.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref53)

[[103] Y.Y. Haimes, On the definition of resilience in systems, Risk Analysis 29 (4 2009)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref54)
[498–501.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref54)

[[104] L. Bu, Q. Wang, X. Chen, et al., Toward online hybrid systems model checking of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref55)
[cyber-physical systems’ time-bounded short-run behavior, ACM SIGBED Rev. 8](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref55)
[(2011) 7–10.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref55)

[[105] N. Paulley, R. Balcombe, R. Mackett, et al., The demand for public transport: The](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref56)
[effects of fares, quality of service, income and car ownership, Trans. Policy 13 (4)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref56)
[(2006) 295–306.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref56)

[[106] E. Nathanail, Measuring the quality of service for passengers on the hellenic](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref57)
[railways, Trans. Res. Part A Policy Pract. 42 (1) (2008) 48–66.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref57)

[107] C. Levy-Bencheton, E. Darra, Cyber security and resilience of intelligent public
transport: good practices and recommendations, tech. rep., European Union
Agency For Network And Information Security (ENISA), 2015.

[[108] M. Bruneau, S.E. Chang, R.T. Eguchi, et al., A Framework to Quantitatively Assess](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref58)
[and Enhance the Seismic Resilience of Communities, Earthquake Spectra 19](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref58)
[(2003) 733–752.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref58)

[[109] N. Poolsappasit, R. Dewri, I. Ray, Dynamic security risk management using](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref59)
[bayesian attack graphs, IEEE Trans. Dependable and Secure Computing 9 (2012)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref59)
[61–74.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref59)

[110] Joint Task Force Transformation Initiative, Guide for applying the risk manage­

ment framework to federal information systems: a security life cycle approach,
Tech. Rep. NIST SP 800–37r1, National Institute of Standards and Technology,
2014.

[111] W. Jiang, B. Fang, H. Zhang, et al., Optimal network security strengthening using
attack-defense game model, in the Sixth International Conference on Information
Technology: New Generations, (2009) 475–480.

[[112] M.H. Manshaei, Q. Zhu, T. Alpcan, et al., Game theory meets network security and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref60)
[privacy, ACM Comput. Surv. 45 (2013) 25–125.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref60)

[[113] M.H. Cintuglu, O.A. Mohammed, K. Akkaya, et al., A survey on smart grid cyber-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref61)
[physical system testbeds, IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts (2016).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref61)

[[114] J.C. Peng Yong, X. Feng, D. Zhonghua, X. Qi, G. Yang, Study on the research](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref62)
[progress of industrial control system cybersecurity, J. Tsinghua Univ. (Sci.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref62)
[Technol.) (2012) 1396–1408.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2949-8678(22)00007-1/sbref62)

[115] E.K. Wang, Y. Ye, X. Xu, et al., Security issues and challenges for cyber physical
system, in Proc. GREENCOM-CPSCOM ’10, IEEE, (2010) 733–738.



17


