_F. Flammini, et al., Int. J. of Safety and Security Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1 (2011) 77–94_

# Modeling of RAILWAY LogicS for Reverse Engineering, Verification and Refactoring


F. FLAMMINI [1,2], A. LAZZARO [1] & N. MAZZOCCA [2]

1ANSALDO STS, RAMS Unit, Via Nuova delle Brecce 260, Naples 80147, Italy.
2University of Naples “Federico II”, Dipartimento di Informatica e Sistemistica, Via Claudio 21,
Naples 80125, Italy.


Abstract
Model-based approaches are widespread both in functional and non-functional verification activities of
critical computer-based systems. Reverse engineering can also be used to support checks for correctness
of system implementation against its requirements. In this paper, we show how a model-based technique,
using the Unified Modeling Language (UML), suits the reverse engineering of complex control logics.
UML is usually exploited to drive the development of software systems, using an object-oriented and
bottom-up approach; however, it can be also used to model legacy non-object-oriented logic processes
featuring a clear distinction between data structures and related operations. Our case-study consists in
the most important component of the European Railway Traffic Management System/European Train
Control System: the Radio Block Center (RBC). The model we obtained from the logic code of the RBC
significantly facilitated both structural and behavioral analyses, giving a valuable contribution to the
static verification and refactoring of the software under test.
_Keywords: control software, modeling, railways, refactoring, reverse engineering, verification._


1 Introduction and background
A large class of fault tolerant systems is constituted by mission and safety critical apparels
employed in industrial control applications, like defense, aerospace and transportation. In
fact, most control systems nowadays feature complex computer-based architectures. Critical
control systems require a number of thorough verification and validation activities, which are
regulated by international standards (see for instance [1, 2]). With reference to software verification, such activities can be roughly divided into static and dynamic ones: static analyses
do not require code execution, while dynamic ones require execution on the target hardware
or in proper simulation environments. Theoretically, static analyses should precede dynamic
ones in the system life cycle, with the aim of finding gross grain errors in coding style and
structure. Once these errors have been detected, the testing phase can begin with the aim of
detecting mostly functional non-conformities [3]. However, in practice code inspection
proves useful to find errors which are very difficult to find by testing alone, and it usually
accompanies testing till the very end of the project, being also useful for diagnostic purposes and to predict behavioral impact of code modifications. More specifically, in Fig. 1,
we provide the well-known V-Life Cycle model used for software development (and prescribed by most international safety standards, see e.g. [2]): the step circled by a light-grey
dashed line represents where the activity described in this paper correspond to the verification stage (right part of the diagram).
The control software of many critical control systems is written, totally or partially, using
application-specific or legacy languages. The choice of using such languages is justified by
several factors, e.g. the dependability of the (validated or highly proven in use) development
environment, the ease of using the ‘natural language like’ syntaxes, the already available
debugging tools, etc. Featuring proprietary syntax and usually missing the support for objectoriented programming structures, the drawbacks of such languages are that no existing


© 2011 WIT Press, www.witpress.com
ISSN: 2041-9031 (paper format), ISSN: 2041-904X (online), http://journals.witpress.com
DOI: 10.2495/SAFE-V1-N1-77-94


78 _F. Flammini, et al., Int. J. of Safety and Security Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1 (2011)_


Figure 1: V-Life Cycle model for critical software development and validation.


methodology or tool can be directly applied to them in order to accomplish the objectives of
test engineers in the static verification phase. Among such objectives we list the following:
## • [To obtain extensive documentation describing in detail how the control logic works, which ]

is necessary for any kind of testing and maintenance activities.
## •• [To trace the architecture and behavior of the control logic into the higher level software ]
specification, allowing for an easy verification of compliance.
## • [To optimize code reliability and performance, possibly by means of refactoring tech-]
niques, that is behavior preserving transformations [4].

Such results can be achieved by means of a proper model-based reverse engineering
approach. Reverse engineering is the process of analyzing a system to identify its components and their interrelationships and to create a representation of the system in another form
or at a higher level of abstraction [5]. Reverse engineering support with a proper bottom-up
modeling of software implementation allows for:
## • [An easier static verification of high level functional requirements, as the model is more ]

compact, expressive and easily readable also by people non-skilled in programming
(e.g. system analysts or application domain experts).
## • [The availability of a flexible representation which can drive the refactoring work, involving ]
code manipulation aimed at software improvement.

In this paper, we describe the application of a model-based reverse engineering approach for
code verification and improvement purposes. Such an approach is aimed at performing a static
analysis – both at the structural and behavioral levels – of the software used for a specific class
of railway control systems. The modeling language which best suits the bottom-up modeling
of logic code, regardless of its syntax, is the Unified Modeling Language (UML). One could
argue that a fundamental constraint for the advantageous use of UML in such context is the use
of object-orientation in logic code. However, although most legacy or application specific
control languages do not feature a specifically object-oriented syntax, they can be objectbased, or used as such, with well known advantages (e.g. data encapsulation). In such
approaches, logic processes are usually associated to a set of data and possible operations of a
well distinguished entity (either physical, e.g. a sensor or an actuator, or logical) of the control


_F. Flammini, et al., Int. J. of Safety and Security Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1 (2011)_ 79

system. In cases where such rules are generally not respected, the approach described in this
paper could still be followed, but a preliminary object-oriented reengineering and design
review would be necessary, whose description is not in the scope of this work.
The use of UML for verification purposes is not as formal as could be code-based model
checking [6], but it easily allows for governing the complexity of real-world systems; furthermore, it constitutes the basis of a series of possible analyses and refinements, as explained in
this paper.
The approach presented in this paper was applied to a real world case-study: the Radio
Block Centre (RBC) of ERTMS/ETCS (European Railway Traffic Managements System/
European Train Control System) [7]. Presently, the certification process of two RBCs
developed by our company included the verification approach described in this paper;
these RBC are already operational, controlling one of the newly developed Italian highspeed railway lines, connecting Turin to Novara. (The line, activated for the Winter
Olympics of Torino 2006, has been operational since February 2006. It is part of the Turin–
Milan line, which is still under development.) To give an idea of its complexity, the control
logic of the RBC is constituted by more than 250,000 lines of code. RBC software is
mainly written using a legacy language, highly ‘proven in use’ in past projects (above all
in interlocking applications; see [6]). Due to the similarity of this process-based (As it will
be clear in the following of this paper, a process of the logic language refers to attributes
and operations of a control entity and must not be confused with a CPU scheduling unit
(though the origin of its name is actually related to the cyclic Real-Time scheduling of the
operations).) with object-based languages, UML-based modeling was quite straightforward and the graphical representation provided, as expected, very useful documentation
and analysis facilities.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 locates the approach in the
context of related works; Section 3 provides a general description of the approach, regardless
of any specific control system, dividing it into three main steps; Section 4 presents ERTMS/
ETCS and then shows by an example the application of the approach to the control logic of
the Radio Block Center; Section 5 summarizes results and future developments.

2 Related works
The work presented in this paper is based on the UML. UML is widely accepted as the de
facto standard in software engineering; its syntax and semantic have been standardized by the
Object Management Group (OMG) [8]. UML is used by a number of commercial automated
modeling and development frameworks (see for instance [9]).
Several applications of UML not strictly related to software design can be found in the
research literature. In [10] the authors present a methodology in which the validation of system
dependability properties since early design stages is based on translation of UML views into
formally analyzable models. In the field of UML based performance verification it is significant to cite the work described in [11]. The article referenced in [12] describes an approach for
automatically generating and executing system tests from UML behavioral diagrams.
A significant amount of literature is available on UML-based refactoring (e.g. [13]) and on
reverse-engineering. A survey of industrial best-practices of reverse engineering is provided
in [14]. Many theoretical works are available on reverse engineering, often dealing with specific issues (it may suffice to cite the IEEE Working Conference on Reverse Engineering).
There also exist tools realizing the reverse engineering step starting from C++ or Java code
(see e.g. [15, 16]). However, such tools cannot operate or be customized to work on proprietary control languages (unfortunately a common scenario).


80 _F. Flammini, et al., Int. J. of Safety and Security Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1 (2011)_

Several research works are also available on UML-based reverse engineering, see
e.g. [17–19]: in the latter, which has some common points with the work presented in this
paper, reverse engineered Sequence Diagrams are compared with design diagrams for the
verification of conformance of the implementation to the design. With respect to the approach
presented in this paper, which also includes structural verification and refactoring based on
more UML views, in [19] the verification is limited to behavioral aspects represented by
means of interaction diagrams (not considering the obvious difference in the criticality of the
application domain).

Considering static analysis (Both in literature and common practice the terms ‘static
analysis’, ‘code review/inspection’ and ‘code walk-through’ usually indicate different
activities; however, in this paper we will generically refer to ‘static verification’ as the set
of activities which are performed without code execution, in contrast to dynamic verification (i.e. testing), requiring simulation.), code inspection [20] and related verification
activities, many works exist in the literature (see for example the approach developed at
Verimag for the static analysis [21]): while they can automate many checks, when it comes
to performing non-trivial inspections their common limitation consists in the fact that the
verifier is not aided by any more or less formal model which would facilitate the work by
providing proper views on the code (in practice, only function call-graphs [22] and code
navigators are used).
The automatic verification of properties on a system model is known as model-checking.
Several approaches to model-checking real-time control systems have been proposed
and successfully applied; some directly on code (see [6, 23, 24]), others on UML models
(see [10, 25, 26]). However, it is generally accepted that formal verification is rarely ade­
quate to govern the complexity of real world systems, and their contribution can be con­si­dered
as complementary to the ones provided by traditional approaches (i.e. static-analysis, code
inspection, structural and functional testing, etc.), as witnessed by several past experiences
(see e.g. [6] for railway and [27] for aerospace applications).
Despite the relevant amount of literature on these subjects, to the best of our knowledge
there is no work dealing with the integration of model-based reverse engineering approaches
in the life-cycle of critical systems for both verification and refactoring purposes, which is the
main topic of this paper. An early application of UML to the analysis of railway control logics
has been described in [28], in which, however, the authors did not yet abstract the methodological aspects, which are necessary to generally and systematically integrate the approach in
the life-cycle of industrial control systems.


3 The general modeling and verification approach
Traditional industrial approaches of static verification are mainly aimed at ensuring that the
code respects the rules of quality standards, that is to say:
## • [it does not feature prohibited statements,] •• [defensive programming controls are regularly implemented,] •• [function length is limited,] •• [comments are regularly and correctly employed,] • [etc.]

Besides such verifications, checklists can be used in order to verify other properties
which are possible to check without program execution (e.g. variables are correctly ini

_F. Flammini, et al., Int. J. of Safety and Security Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1 (2011)_ 81

tialized, the number of iterations and stop conditions of cycles is correct, etc.) [20]. While
some controls can be automated, many others are left to the sensibility of testers who
perform code inspection (or ‘walk-throughs’), and therefore are quite error prone. This is
generally considered not a main issue, as most of residual errors are usually more easily
found by means of dynamic analyses (i.e. software testing). In other words, it is generally
accepted that static verifications are meant to find as many errors as possible before code
execution, but they cannot assure extensive error detection or compliance to high level
requirements. Nevertheless, in practice the impact of static means of analysis becomes
more significant as code complexity grows, because of the limitation of the test-set. Furthermore, the test-case limited execution time often reduces the probability to detect
latent errors due to wrong assignment of variables: it can happen that a test-case is considered as passed because monitored variables are assigned correct values, but if execution
continued in a certain way, the system would hang (hopefully) or even produce incorrect
output. Finally, as functional test effectiveness is usually measured by means of decision
coverage and rarely by means of data-flow coverage (whose exhaustiveness is nearly
always impossible to achieve in practice), test engineers tend to say that some ‘datarelated’ errors can only be detected by code inspection, hence the importance of such a
verification phase.
However, there are two significant limitations in traditional static analysis approaches. The
first one is that they are not focused on behavioral analysis, in the assumption that system
behavior is hardly checked statically; however, a behavioral check at the static analysis stage
would be highly advantageous, as it could:
## • [highlight unconformities hard to be found by testing and/or at an early stage of system ]

development;
## • [evaluate the impact of code modifications on system predicted behavior.]

The second limitation is that traditional static analysis hardly helps verifiers to suggest
system level design reviews, reengineering or code restructuring aimed at improving software implementation, with effects on reliability and performance. Some efforts toward such
objective can be made with general purpose programming languages, like C, for which specific tools are available providing function call graphs and other high level informal views on
the code (see e.g. [22, 29]). However, the effectiveness of such views in helping verifiers to
find errors and improvement possibilities is quite limited.
An attractive and feasible way to govern code complexity is represented by model-based
approaches, allowing to facilitate traditional analyses as well as enable new ones. As
mentioned in Section 2, while model-driven software development literature is quite rich,
model-based verification literature is often focused on dynamic analyses (i.e. software testing)
and/or limited by the use of single representations (e.g. state diagrams).
The main novelty of the model-based methodology proposed in this paper is the extensive
application of UML to the static analysis of a piece of critical software. On the base of our
successful experience, we believe that the systematic integration of such an approach in
system life-cycle is very advantageous both in terms of effectiveness (more errors are
revealed before the dynamic verification stage) and efficiency (engineers are facilitated in
their static analysis work by exploiting high-level graphical representations). Furthermore,
the approach also facilitates the improvement of software design by enabling UML-based


82 _F. Flammini, et al., Int. J. of Safety and Security Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1 (2011)_

refactoring techniques. In fact, the so-called ‘design review’ is an important aspect of software verification, given its potential impact on maintainability, reliability and performance.
UML is undoubtedly the most comprehensive language for software modeling. In fact, an
extensive UML model:
## • [abstracts code implementation in order to facilitate comprehension of both code structure ]

and behavior;
## •• [can be more easily checked by hand or even by using specific model checkers, whenever ]
available;
## • [provide means to support code review and improvement (i.e. refactoring).]

In order to employ such a UML-based approach in the static analysis stage of legacy
systems, the software must be reverse engineered. Such operation is syntax specific and
automatable. Once the model is available, it can be checked for verification against
functional requirements and refactoring, as explained in the following sections.
An important general aspect of the approach is that it also embodies in a semi-formal
and structured way the Agile Modeling idea of ‘modeling to understand’ [30], which
stresses the importance to have as many views on the code as possible. Therefore, besides
enabling systematic verification approaches (e.g. based on traceability or model-checking),
modeling itself can reveal errors as it provides useful insights about code structure and
behavior.
In summary, our approach can be divided into three main steps, to be executed sequentially
(the former providing the output for latter): (1) reverse engineering, consisting in building the
UML model from the logic code; (2) verification of compliance with logic specification, by
means of a traceability study; and (3) refactoring, that is code restructuring based on the
available and already verified UML model. Such approach is represented in Fig. 2 and
described in the following sections.


Figure 2: Three steps scheme of the modeling and verification approach: (1) reverse
engineering; (2) verification of compliance; and (3) refactoring.


_F. Flammini, et al., Int. J. of Safety and Security Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1 (2011)_ 83

3.1 Step 1: Reverse engineering

The first step consists in building a UML model of the logic code, using proper diagrams,
with the main aim to compare such representation (obtained ‘bottom-up’) with the high-level
logic requirements in order to verify the compliance of system implementation with its
specification.
While building the diagrams, it is also possible to verify ‘on-the-fly’ the basic rules of a good
object-oriented programming paradigm (e.g. data encapsulation into objects) and plan a first
level restructuring of the code, which however will be implemented only after logic behavior is
verified (see Section 3.3 on code refactoring). Furthermore, by using a modeling environment
which is not only a diagram drawing tool, but also a syntax verifier, it is possible to automatically check the correctness of the model in terms of some classes of errors, e.g. call of an
undefined operation. This may appear as a trivial control, but in practice such errors are often
destined to remain latent until the related code is exercised; however, for critical systems some
code blocks are hardly exercised, with the risk of causing system failures (hopefully, safe shutdowns) in the rare cases in which they are needed, e.g. to manage specific exceptions.
The most important structural view which can be built from the code consists in class diagrams, statically showing the relationships between logic processes. Class diagrams provide
a static view which is able to give test engineers at a glance and integrated representations of
software architecture [31].
Among behavioral views, sequence diagrams best suit to represent the dynamic aspects of
logic processes, by highlighting process interactions in terms of execution of operations
and data structure modifications. Sequence diagrams allow an easy comparison of process
behavior with the one requested by the high-level specification, which are written in natural
language in the form of input–output relations (see Section 3.2).
State diagrams (or ‘state charts’) also constitute an important behavioral view which can
be employed to check process state transitions. Other types of UML diagrams (e.g. Usecase and Activity) can be used as additional views, e.g. to simplify the understanding of
complex operations. For example, Use-case Diagrams (which are missing in Fig. 2)
are often used to model the triggering of the interactions (i.e. scenarios) between
external actors and internal processes, described in details by means of Sequence Diagrams
(see Sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.3).


3.2 Step 2: Verification of compliance

Several types of verifications are possible on the UML diagrams. As first, it is important to
verify that functionalities specified in logic requirements are present in the code and no
unnecessary functionalities are present. This sort of coverage and traceability analysis for
functions is facilitated by verifications on the UML models. A second straightforward verification is that sequence diagrams should only contain the processes involved, as specified by
high-level requirements. Beside specification-based verifications, state diagrams also offer
verification possibilities only based on software implementation: the reachability of all process states must be guaranteed, the occurrence of ‘sink states’ (i.e. states with no outgoing
transitions) should be prevented, etc. Such kind of analyses can be performed informally,
exploiting the know-how and skill of system experts, but can also be (at least partially) automated. State diagrams can also be model-checked, which can be advantageous for specific
pieces of software, e.g. the ones managing communication protocols.


84 _F. Flammini, et al., Int. J. of Safety and Security Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1 (2011)_

A formal traceability analysis can be obtained by a hierarchical superposition of sequence
diagrams, with the aim of matching the ones obtained top-down from the high-level logic
specification with those obtained bottom-up by logic code modeling. To perform this, partial
sequence diagrams have to be linked to build up complete scenarios. In other words, after
process operations are modeled singularly in sequence diagrams, they have to be linked
together in order to form a complete scenario, from the first triggering of an operation to the
reaching of a stable state, in order to be traceable on the high-level system specification.


3.3 Step 3: Refactoring

Analysis, refinement and optimization by code restructuring constitute the last step of the
process. A generally accepted definition of refactoring can be found in [4]: ‘the process of
changing a software system in such a way that it does not alter the external behavior of the
code, yet improves its internal structure’.
In our approach, refactoring is performed on the UML diagrams and then implemented topdown in the logic code. The availability of a model of the software under analysis, featuring
complementary views, allows for an easy detection of the so-called ‘smells’ in the code [13].
Smells are simply defined as code structures that suggest the possibility of refactoring, like
degenerate classes, e.g. too large or too small, featuring only data, pleonastic (just forwarding
method calls), etc. In particular, for critical systems, defensive programming controls have to
be added to check and react on inputs that are illegal or incompatible with process status, in
order to tolerate casual (e.g. soft-errors in memories) as well as possibly systematic faults.
Moreover, refactoring can involve the grouping of condition checks, the re-ordering of checks
(weighted by occurrence probability and/or by the number of necessary steps to perform the
check of the condition) and other specific performance optimizations. The use of sequence
diagrams allows test engineers to precisely weigh the condition checks in terms of needed
interactions between logic processes, and thus in terms of elaboration cycles.
As for the respect of object-orientation, whenever necessary, operations must be added in
class diagrams in order to let processes modify variables of other processes only by using
specific methods and not by directly accessing external attributes. Such a modification also
allows moving defensive programming controls from the calling methods to the newly added
ones, possibly gaining in reliability, readability and code length.
The behavioral impact of such modifications can be easily checked by means of UML
sequence and state diagrams. In particular, state diagrams also allow for behavioral refinements, e.g. aimed at moving/grouping states in composite ones. As compliance with high-level
requirements has already been verified in the previous step, it is necessary that such transformations preserve the logic behavior of the system.


4 An industrial application: the Radio Block Center
In our experience with the RBC, almost all the activities described in Section 3 were performed by hand; in fact, while the building and verification of the model is theoretically
automatable, when the verification process started we were not completely confident about
the worth of automating it (see Section 5 for future developments). As aforementioned, the
structure of RBC logic processes well suits to be modeled using an object-based language:
logic processes can be easily thought of as classes, with their internal ‘variables’ constituting
the attributes, and their ‘commands’ being the operations. In particular, the ‘process status’
variable has been represented in a specific state diagram, as it triggers most of the process


_F. Flammini, et al., Int. J. of Safety and Security Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1 (2011)_ 85

behavior and thus is very critical. The modeling tool we used to build UML diagrams was the
Rational Rose Modeler Edition [9]. While building the model we exploited all the syntactic
controls and automations of the Rational Rose Modeler application, which constituted a first
congruity check on the model under construction. Some examples: as the model grows up,
the already defined links are automatically added by the application; in sequence diagrams, it
is not possible to call an operation which has not been already defined in class diagrams; the
accessibility of attributes and operations (public, protected, private) is automatically checked;
etc. Next section will provide a general introduction to ERTMS/ETCS.


4.1 ERTMS/ETCS level 2 system implementation

ERTMS/ETCS is the specification of a standard aiming at improving safety, performance and
interoperability of European railways [7]. In Italy, the so-called Level 2 specification of
ERTMS/ETCS is implemented in high-speed railway lines. ERTMS/ETCS specifies three
main subsystems: trackside, on-board and lineside. The trackside subsystem is the ground part
of the overall system, and manages railway signaling to ensure safe train separation and routing. The most important trackside subsystem is the Radio Block Center, which has the aim of
collecting track and train information in order to provide trains with necessary data: Movement Authorities (MA), that is the distance trains are authorized to move on; Static Speed
Profiles (SSP), that is maximum speed limits allowed by the track; possible Emergency Stops
(ES). The on-board control system performs train protection by controlling train speed against
the elaborated dynamic speed profiles (or braking curves). The lineside is constituted by the
so-called balises, which are devices positioned between the track lines, which have the aim to
transmit geographical positioning data to the trains passing over them; such data is used by the
on-board system in order to build and send position reports to the trackside.
The Radio Block Center is responsible of providing train headways by using data received
in train position reports and delivering the correct MA, SSP and ES messages to the trains. In
order to detect the necessary route and Track Circuit (TC) occupation status, RBC is connected to the national Interlocking (IXL) system, which is not standardized in ERTMS.
Moreover, the RBC is usually able to manage a limited number of track sections, thus it must
be connected to other adjacent RBCs in order to allow for the so-called train Hand-Over (HO).
The Hand-Over is the complex procedure that manages the passage of a train from the area
supervised by a RBC to the area of adjacent RBCs. In ERTMS level 2, the on-board and trackside communicate by the GSM-R radio network using the Euroradio protocol (see Fig. 3).
The software architecture of the RBC is depicted in Fig. 3. It consists of some ‘application’
processes (written in a safe subset of the C programming language), which manage the interaction of the RBC with the external entities (i.e. other subsystems and the RBC operator), and
some ‘logic’ processes, which implement the control logic of the RBC; the latter are written
in an application specific logic language, as already mentioned above.
The Logic Manager has to interpret logic language, translating it into executable code, and
to schedule the logic processes. The shaded rectangles in Fig. 4 represent the logic processes,
which are the target of our work. For instance, the ‘MA’ process, shown in Fig. 3, verifies the
integrity of the Movement Authority assigned to the train against all the significant track and
route conditions. Such conditions are received from the interlocking system by means of the
‘IXL interaction’ application process and are managed by the ‘TC’ logic process, which
stores Track Circuit physical conditions in its internal variables. If the MA integrity verification fails (for instance a track circuit is not clear or involved in an emergency condition), the


86 _F. Flammini, et al., Int. J. of Safety and Security Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1 (2011)_


Figure 3: ERTMS/ETCS level 2 reference architecture for the trackside subsystem.


Figure 4: The software architecture of the Radio Block Center.



MA process has to command the sending of an emergency message to the ‘Train interaction’
application process, which will manage the sending of the proper radio message to the train.
In this simple example, the MA and TC processes interact with the application processes to
manage data from and to the external subsystems; moreover, they interact with each other, as
the MA process asks the TC process for the status of track circuits, in order to verify the
integrity of the movement authorities.
There are many other logic processes which behave in a similar way. They all can feature:


## • [a set of data variables and a special ‘process status’ variable;]


## •• [a set of ‘operations’ which can be activated:]



by application processes or the RBC operator by means of ‘manual commands’;


_F. Flammini, et al., Int. J. of Safety and Security Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1 (2011)_ 87

by other logic processes, issuing ‘automatic commands’; directly, when the process
status variable is assigned a certain value.

Typical process operations are:
## •• [verify conditions on internal variables or on the ones of different processes;] •• [assign values to variables which can be either internal to the process or belonging to other ]

processes (the Logic Manager does not restrict the visibility and modifiability of variables);
## •• [issue ‘automatic commands’ to other processes;] • [issue ‘application commands’ to application processes (e.g. ‘send MA’).]

In order to exhaustively explain the reverse engineering procedure, it would be necessary
to introduce all the syntactic constructs of the logic language (which have been briefly
described in [6]) and the related modeling rules. However, an exhaustive explanation of
modeling rules is not in the scope of this work, for two main reasons: as first, the rules, being
language specific, would not be of any interest out of the industrial context of railway control systems produced by Ansaldo Segnalamento Ferroviario (not considering confidentiality
issues); second, once defined the rules, the reverse engineering phase is mechanical and
hence of no theoretical relevance. Of course, the translation procedure must be complete
and sound, covering all the syntactic constructs: starting from the low level logic language
elements, it is possible to unambiguously identify, e.g. the activation of a process operation,
naming conventions, comments, state variables, etc. This is facilitated by the absence in the
language of dynamic binding, pointers or references; in fact, the language was specifically
developed to be understandable by non-programmers. The result is that the reverse engineering procedure can easily be automated, in analogy with Computer Aided Software
Engineering (CASE) tools featuring ‘round-trip’ engineering facilities suitable for general
purpose languages (see e.g. [15]). Differently from such tools, the representation provided
by the proprietary tool we are presently developing is application specific, that is to say it
provides a representation fitting the specific needs of test engineers (a general and difficult
to check representation would not prove useful for verification purposes).
Next section will provide an example application of the model-based reverse engineering
approach to the RBC case-study.

4.2 Reverse engineering, static verification and refactoring of the RBC

In this section, the modeling technique from RBC logic language to UML diagrams is
described by referring to the simple ‘Change of Traction Power’ (CTP) logic process. To give
an idea of its relative complexity, such process is nearly 20 times smaller in terms of lines of
code with respect to the MA process (the latter being very difficult to describe in detail without an in depth knowledge of the RBC software architecture).
The CTP process has to manage manual commands of activation/deactivation of a change
of traction power line section coming from the RBC operator. The activation/deactivation
commands must be accepted only if the track circuit in which there is a change of power is
free and not included in a MA assigned to a train. In the following we present the UML based
modeling and analysis for such example process.

4.2.1 Use-case diagrams
Use-case diagrams represent how a logic process can be used by application processes or by
the operator using manual commands; therefore, they represent the externally triggered


88 _F. Flammini, et al., Int. J. of Safety and Security Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1 (2011)_

high-level procedures (see Fig. 5). Usually, at least one use-case diagram is specified for
each system level scenario (e.g. Start of Mission, Hand-Over, etc.).
Use-case diagrams are significant in representing all the possible functional scenarios
involving the logic process, hence giving the possibility to verifiers to check the validity of
the actions performed on the process at a very high abstraction level; however, they reveal
not so useful for refactoring purposes.

4.2.2 Class diagrams
Class diagrams are built starting from a static software architecture view (data structure with
internal/public attributes, operations), also showing the relationships and interactions
between processes (i.e. read/write of attributes and method calls). Class diagrams represent
the backbone of the entire model, as the first modeling step consists in the definition of a class
for each of the logic processes. The relationships between classes are determined by the
‘access’ or ‘assign’ statements (as aforementioned, all process variables are considered as
public by the Logic Manager) and by issuing commands triggering process operations. Given
the high number of associations (some processes can share up to 20 distinct links) a comprehensive class diagram would be very complex and hardly readable. It is preferable to build
partial class diagrams, each one focusing on a single process and showing all the incoming
and outgoing links to/from that process. As shown in Fig. 6, the CTP process features two
local variables, a single refereed process (TC) and two operations. In case a process only
accesses (or ‘reads’) data of another process (usually to check some conditions on the state
of the other process), the link is modeled by a dependency relation (dashed line). In case,
instead, the process also activates operations of the other process (by automatic commands),
the link is modeled as a real association (full line). If the modeler does not need to build an


Figure 5: Use-case diagram for the CTP logic process.


Figure 6: Class diagram for the CTP logic process.


_F. Flammini, et al., Int. J. of Safety and Security Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1 (2011)_ 89

executable model (as in our case), he/she does not need to be fully compliant to the UML
standard, and can therefore adapt the notation to his/her needs (It is important to remark that
the future re-use of the models for re-design or automated source code generation will be
hindered by this approach; therefore, we are now moving toward an adherence to the official
OMG standard; see Section 5.). For instance, we also associated a list of accessed variables
and operations to relations, as a further documentation.
From the class diagram, we can see that the CTP process is used by the MA process: this
is correct because the MA process has to manage the presence of a CTP section as additional
information to be added to the outgoing MA message in order to inform the on-board system
of the CTP procedure. From the CTP class diagram it is evident that at least a refactoring
action is necessary: class attributes must be kept as private, and a Get_CTP_State() operation
(which is missing in the diagram) must be added in order to access the CTP state.

4.2.3 Sequence diagrams
Sequence diagrams are specified for each operation, showing its implementation and the
detailed interactions between logic processes involved in that operation. A full arrow has
been used for check and assignment statements, specifying the nature of the operation as a
comment. A normal arrow is used, instead, for the activation of an operation. For better clarity, complex diagrams have been detailed using linked notes. In Fig. 7, we report an example
sequence diagram for the CTP process, showing the activation operation (the deactivation is
very similar): when an activation command is received, the state variable of the associated
TC (belonging to a properly declared list of linked processes) must be checked in order to
verify whether it is assigned the ‘free’ and ‘not requested’ (for a Movement Authority) conditions; if such condition is fulfilled, the automatic command Set_CTP_Active() can be issued
to the TC process. The behavior obtained by checking such diagram is perfectly adherent to
the related requirement stated by system specification.
In general, the traceability and verification of compliance can be performed as follows.
Using sequence diagrams, the execution process can be statically analyzed from the external
activation of an operation (by a ‘manual command’, as reported in Use-case diagrams) to
the reaching of a stable process state, e.g. the one that follows the sending of a message to
an application process. A proper package named ‘Scenarios’, containing all scenario
sequence diagrams, has been created for the traceability analysis. Each ‘composed’ or ‘highlevel’ sequence diagram represents a scenario of, e.g. Start of Mission, Hand-Over,
Emergency, and so on.


Figure 7: Sequence diagram for the CTP logic process.


90 _F. Flammini, et al., Int. J. of Safety and Security Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1 (2011)_

By checking sequence diagrams, we discovered that in some cases the controls on the
feasibility of a manual command were missing. This was easy to visually check on the
diagrams as well as to be automated by defining a rule according to which such control
must be performed for each command received by a process. In particular, the check
allowed to detect a missing control in the ES process causing the RBC to safely shutdown when the user tried to send an emergency message to a non-existing train number.
Usually, such errors are revealed in the functional testing phase, while the approach
described in this paper allowed test engineers to detect them earlier in system V&V process. Furthermore, by tracing sequence diagrams into functional requirements, we
discovered some pieces of code related to never referenced operations, which were inherited from an early specification: an application of refactoring, in this case, consisted in
removing such pleonastic operations and attributes. Sequence diagrams also prove very
useful for refactoring, of which we present in the following a quite general example. From
the analysis of sequence diagrams, we realized that most of the RBC logic code was made
up by condition verification statements. Such statements are clearly explicated in sequence
diagrams, which also show their expected weight in terms of process interactions and thus
of elaboration cycles (given the fixed policy, each interaction with an already scheduled
process requires a further elaboration cycle). For instance, ‘lighter’ condition verifications
only need an access to one or more internal attributes; ‘heavier’ ones involve the interaction of two or more processes, and can last several elaboration cycles in the fixed process
scheduling scheme. Therefore, by properly grouping and shifting conditions we were able
to predict and minimize the average number of controls performed by the RBC, with a
significant improvement in system performance, which directly impacted on the number
of trains the RBC was able to manage (final gain was about the 30%). For instance, if a
TC is involved in an emergency condition, there is no need to check its occupation status:
as stated by the functional requirements, immediately after the emergency is detected, an
emergency message must be sent to the train. Thus, it would be natural to set such control
as the first to be performed. However, the probability of an emergency is very low, and
such a check would be false most of the times, wasting elaboration time. Therefore, starting from the consideration that an emergency must always include all the TC of a track
section (at least 3), a more effective design review consisted in adding a new process
named Track Section and making the MA process perform a single check on this process
instead of performing it for each TC.
Please note that real-time constraint are not taken into account in the specific application
(ERTMS/ETCS trackside subsystem) as the on-board system is responsible for reacting to
excessive delays in receiving messages from the RBC. The reaction consists in the application of service or emergency brakes activated by a proper channel vitality monitor, as specified
by the standard, which also protects from loss of radio packets due to GSM-R unavailability.
Therefore, the delay in sending messages by the trackside subsystem only has an impact on
system performance (which is tested apart) but not on its safety.

4.2.4 State diagrams
State diagrams show the transitions of the state variables of the logic processes against the
possible triggering events. The CTP state diagram shown in Fig. 8 has been simplified to be
self-explaining. By checking the diagram it is immediately clear that for the CTP process all
input conditions at any state have been considered, and there are no unreachable or deadlock
states (which have been detected and corrected for some other processes). In the design
phase, the state machine of each process of the Radio Block Center has been kept enough


_F. Flammini, et al., Int. J. of Safety and Security Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1 (2011)_ 91


Figure 8: State diagram for the CTP logic process.


simple to be easily checked manually (this is part of the ‘design for verifiability’ approach
which is widespread in safety-critical system development – even though the state machine
associate to each process is quite simple, the complexity of system behaviour requires nonstraightforward interactions among processes, whose extensive verification can only be
accomplished by simulation). In case of more complex state diagrams, automated approaches
for property verification (deadlock, liveness, safety, etc.) on UML state diagrams can be
applied, as reported in literature (see e.g. [25, 26]).
State diagrams prove very useful in checking the correct implementation of the state
machine related to each process, being suitable to informal, semi-formal and formal means
of analysis. As for the informal approach, this was facilitated by the fact that the RBC state
machine associated to a certain procedure was often completely specified in high-level system requirements. In all this cases, including, e.g. Hand-Over process, the direct comparison
has been quite straightforward. On the formal side, a model-based analysis of the HO procedure has been possible by combining the state diagrams of two adjacent RBCs. This enabled
verifiers to perform a combined check of the state-space evolution of both RBCs, allowing
them to find and correct several errors which were very difficult to find by plain code inspection or simulation.

5 Conclusions, lessons learnt and future works
In this paper, we have reported our experience with a reverse engineering approach aimed at
modeling the (legacy) control software of critical systems for verification and refactoring
purposes. The approach allows code verifiers to manage the complexity of critical control
software by understanding and analyzing in detail its structure and behavior; therefore, we
believe it should be advantageously integrated in the verification process of critical systems
developed or re-engineered using an object-based or similar approach. The main advantages
of the approach are that:
## • [It provides a way to facilitate and improve traditional code inspection/walk-through analy-]

ses. In fact, our experience proved that the support of a model enhanced effectiveness and
proved both more efficient and less error prone with respect to traditional less systematic
approaches.
## • [The availability of a UML model of the software enables further analyses to be performed ]
prior to code execution, including functional verification (exploiting diagram-requirements traceability), and reliability/performance optimization.

Having experienced the automated reverse engineering facilities of CASE tools, we
believe that the approach works best if the reverse engineering criteria are tailored to the


92 _F. Flammini, et al., Int. J. of Safety and Security Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1 (2011)_

specific application. Therefore, the translation from legacy languages to C++/Java in order to
exploit existing tools is very likely to produce unsatisfactory results. According to our experience, the effort should rather be concentrated on building easily readable/analyzable diagrams
directly from the logic code. Once the reverse engineering rules have been defined, the main
task of construction and maintenance of the UML model becomes quite trivial and possibly
automatable.
The application of the approach to the Radio Block Center, a complex real-world casestudy, allowed test engineers to significantly enhance both the effectiveness and efficiency
of the usual static verification phase, traditionally performed by code inspection. With
respect to previous projects of similar complexity, the static verification process was
significantly speeded-up and the number of revealed bugs at this stage (before any dynamic
analysis) was more than double (the final number of discovered errors remaining approximately the same). As a further advantage, the availability of a model also allowed test
engineers to reduce the time to diagnose the errors detected during the subsequent
functional testing phase.
We are now working on the automation of model construction by formalizing the translation rules from logic code to UML views and implementing them in an automatic tool. The
verification of model properties is also partly automatable (reference [10] reports an effort in
defining formal techniques, including model checking, to be used on UML diagrams). The
traceability and verification of compliance with natural language requirements would obviously benefit from a formalization of the functional requirements. This requires a considerable
maintenance effort which is presently under evaluation to estimate the cost/benefit ratio.
Much of the work described in this paper has been performed by hand because at the
time it was conceived we were not yet confident that the advantages of the approach were
such to justify the development of new tools; the only tool used in practice was the Rational
Rose Modeler Edition [9], of which we exploited the sketching facilities and the model
consistency verifications, as explained in Section 4. The success story of our experience
has undoubtedly given a strong impulse to new tool developments, which are currently in
progress. As described in Section 4.2.3, a missing control on the actability of a manual
command could be discovered by parsing the sequence diagrams with an automatic tool,
instead of using the visual and error prone human check. Automatic verification of state
diagrams, as introduced in Section 4.2.4, also seems viable [25]. In order to achieve these
objectives, a stronger formalization based on MDA [32] is also in progress, together with
the systematic integration of the approach within the company standard practice for the
certification of new products.


References
[1] Heath, W.S., _Real-time Software Techniques_, Van Nostrand Reinhold: New York, 1991.
[2] CENELEC: EN 50126 Railways Applications – The specification and demonstration of
Reliability, Maintainability and Safety (RAMS), 2001.
[3] De Nicola, G., di Tommaso, P., Esposito, R., Flammini, F., Marmo, P. & Orazzo, A.,
A grey box approach to the functional testing of complex automatic train protection
systems. _LNCS_, **3463**, pp. 305–317, 2005.
[4] Fowler, M. _et al_ ., _Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code_, 1st edn,
Addison-Wesley Professional, 1999.
[5] Chikofsky, E.J. & Cross, J.H., Reverse engineering and design recovery: a taxonomy.
_IEEE Software_, **7(1)** [, 1990. doi:10.1109/52.43044](http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/52.43044)


_F. Flammini, et al., Int. J. of Safety and Security Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1 (2011)_ 93

[6] Cimatti, A., Giunchiglia, F., Mongardi, G., Romano, D., Torielli, F. & Traverso, P.,
Formal verification of a railway interlocking system using model checking. _Formal_
_Aspects of Computing_, **10(4)** [, pp. 361–380, 1998. doi:10.1007/s001650050022](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s001650050022)
[7] UNISIG ERTMS/ETCS – Class 1 Issue 2.2.2 Subset 026, 2001.
[8] OMG Unified Modeling Language: http://www.omg.org/uml
[9] Rational Corporation: http://www.rational.com

[10] Bondavalli, A., Fantechi, A., Latella, D. & Simoncini, L., Design validation of embedded dependable systems. _IEEE Micro_, **21(5)** [, pp. 52–62, 2001. doi:10.1109/40.958699](http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/40.958699)

[11] Mirandola, R. & Cortellessa, V., UML Based Performance Modeling of Distributed
Systems. _Proceedings of UML_, pp. 178–193, 2000.

[12] Briand, L. & Labiche, Y., A UML-based approach to system testing. _In Journal of_
_Software and Systems Modeling_, **1(1)**, pp. 10–42, 2002.

[13] Astels, D., Refactoring with UML. _Proc. of the 3rd International Conference on_
_eXtreme Programming and Flexible Processes in Software Engineering_, pp. 67–70, 2002.

[14] Tonella, P., Torchiano, M., Du Bois, B. & Systä, T., Empirical studies in reverse
engineering: state of the art and future trends. _Empirical Software Engineering_,
**12(5)**, 2007, DOI 10.1007/s10664-007-9037-5, http://www.springerlink.com/content/
[30881032523123r2 doi:10.1007/s10664-007-9037-5](http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10664-007-9037-5)

[15] Visual Paradigm Code Reverse: http://www.visual-paradigm.com/VPGallery/codeengine/

CodeReverse.html

[16] Interactive Objects ArchStyler: http://www.interactive-objects.com/products/arcstyler

[17] Cung, A. & Lee, Y.S., Reverse Software Engineering with UML for website
maintenance. _IEEE Proceedings of Working Conference in Reverse Engineering’00_,
pp. 100–111, 2000.

[18] Riva, C., Selonen, P., Systa, T. & Xu, J., UML-based reverse engineering and model
analysis approaches for software architecture maintenance. _Proceedings of the 20th_
_IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance (ICSM’04)_ .

[19] Briand, L., Labiche, Y. & Leduc, J., Toward the reverse engineering of UML sequence
diagrams for distributed Java software. _IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering_,
**32(9)** [, pp. 642–663, 2006. doi:10.1109/TSE.2006.96](http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2006.96)

[20] Rady de Almeida Jr, J., Batista Camargo Jr, J., Abrantes Basseto, B. & Paz, P.,
Best practices in code inspection for safety-critical software. _IEEE Software_, **20(3)**,
[pp. 56–63, 2003. doi:10.1109/MS.2003.1196322](http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MS.2003.1196322)

[21] Verimag IF: http://www-verimag.imag.fr/~async/IF/index.html

[22] Telelogic Logiscope: http://www.telelogic.com/logiscope/

[23] Bernardeschi, C., Fantechi, A., Gnesi, S., Mongardi, G. & Romano, D., A formal
verification environment for railway signaling system design. _Formal Methods in_
_System Design_, **12** [, pp. 139–161. 1998. doi:10.1023/A:1008645826258](http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1008645826258)

[24] Gnesi, S., Latella, D., Lenzini, G., Abbaneo, C., Amendola, A. & Marmo, P., An
automatic SPIN validation of a safety critical railway control system. _IEEE Interna-_
_tional Conference on Dependable Systems & Networks_, pp. 119–124, 2000.

[25] Dong, W., Wang, J., Qi, X. & Qi, Z.-C., Model checking UML statecharts. _Eighth_
_Asia-Pacific Software Engineering Conference (APSEC 2001)_, pp. 363–370, 2001.
[doi:10.1109/APSEC.2001.991503](http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/APSEC.2001.991503)

[26] Gnesi, S., Latella, D. & Massink, M., Model checking UML statechart diagrams
using JACK. _The 4th IEEE International Symposium on High-Assurance Systems_
_Engineering_, pp. 46–55, 1999.


94 _F. Flammini, et al., Int. J. of Safety and Security Eng., Vol. 1, No. 1 (2011)_

[27] Havelund, K., Lowry, M. & Penix, J., Formal analysis of a space-craft controller
using SPIN. _IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering_, **27(8)**, pp. 749–765, 2001.
[doi:10.1109/32.940728](http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/32.940728)

[28] Abbaneo, C., Flammini, F., Lazzaro, A., Marmo, P., Mazzocca, N. & Sanseviero, A.,
UML Based Reverse Engineering for the Verification of Railway Control Logics. _IEEE_
_Proceedings of Dependability of Computer Systems (DepCoS’96)_, Szklarska Poręba:
Poland, pp. 3–10, May 25–27, 2006.

[29] Source Dynamics Source Insight: http://www.sourceinsight.com/

[30] Agile Modeling: http://www.agilemodeling.com/

[31] Egyed, N., Medvidovic: Consistent Architectural Refinement and Evolution using the
Unified Modeling Language. _Proceedings of ICSE 2001_, Toronto, **3463**, pp. 305–317,
2005.

[32] OMG Model Driven Architecture: http://www.omg.org/mda/


